Figure 7.1
In 1324, Mansa Musa, King of Mali,
made a pilgrimage to Mecca that
brought the attention of the Muslim
world to the wealth of his kingdom.
A Jewish cartographer in Spain,
Abraham Cresques, depicted the
trip more than fifty years later in
this map. Mansa Musa is depicted
at the bottom right with a golden
scepter and crown, symbolizing his
royal power, and an enormous gold
nugget, symbolizing his country’s.
wealth.

Science History Images/Alamy Stock
Photo

~~ Contents and Learning Objectives

er reading each section, you should be able to answer these questions:
%
African Societies: Diversity and Similarities

What were the main political and religious forms in sub-Saharan
Africa, and what were some of the principal regional patterns?
Kingdoms of the Grasslands

How did the Sudanic kingdoms develop in the Sahel, and.what
advantages did they have?

73 The Swahili Coast of East Africa

How integrated into international commerce were the cities of East

__ Africa, and why? |
“4 Peoples of the Forest and Plains
What kinds of political organization developed in Central and
Southern Africa? 7

--- End of Page 1 ---
166 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 12UU-145U

IN 1324, A'GREAT CARAVAN OF more than a hundred camels, many slaves, and a mul-
titude of retainers crossed the arid Sahara desert and wended its way into Cairo, on the
banks of the Nile. Mansa Musa, lord of the African empire of Mali, was making the haj,
the pilgrimage to Mecca, distributing gold with an open hand. The wealth and prodigal-
ity of the young king dazzled all who witnessed it, his polished manners and command
of Arabic impressed those who met him, and his fame spread throughout the Islamic
world and beyond. The chronicler al-Omari, who visited Cairo a dozen years later, re-
ported that people still spoke of the entourage of the young king that had spent so much
gold in the markets and had given so much as gifts and alms that the price of gold actu-
ally declined due to its ample supply. Other great caravans had made the trek from Mali
across the desert before, and some came after, but none had been so magnificent. Mansa
Musa’s caravan symbolized the wealthy potential of Africa, but even by the time he made
his trip, West African gold was already well known in the world economy, and Africa was.
already involved in contacts of various kinds with other areas of the world (Figure 7.1).

Mali, the kingdom of this great lord, fascinated the Muslim observers in Cairo,
Damascus, and Fez. Like the earlier kingdom of Ghana, Mali was another state of the sa-
vanna country, between the desert and the forests of West Africa. Mali was formed by the
Malinke peoples, and its access to gold and control of the caravan routes had promoted
its rise, while its powerful army had created an empire that extended over much of the
savanna from the Niger to the Senegal River. Its ruling farhilies had converted to Islam,
but the famous and cosmopolitan Moroccan traveler Abdallah Ibn Battuta, who visited
Mali not long after Mansa Musa’s pilgrimage, found the local customs and food less re-
fined than those of the elegant courts to which he was accustomed, and he found some
of the practices shocking. Yet much was recognizable to him as well. Mali was an African
kingdom that had become an extension of the Islamic world, and its success was tied to
the trade routes that linked it to the Mediterranean and the Middle East.

The history of Mali underlines the fact that Africa below the Sahara was never totally
isolated from the centers of civilization in Egypt, West Asia, or the Mediterranean, but
for long periods the contacts were difficult and intermittent. This chapter will examine*
the increasing impact of a growing international network on Africa roughly in the period
M between 1200 and 1600 c.z. The arrival of Islam, after 800 -¢.2., had transformed many
aspects of life in some African societies and brought them into wider contacts through
j trade, politics, and cultural exchange. But we must also recognize that the African societies
influenced by Islam often maintained their own traditions and that other African regions
remained little touched by Islam and continued to develop along their own trajectories.
It is also important to realize that interactions with North Africa and the Middle East did
not extend to direct encounters with the great Mongol Empire during this crucial period.
African civilizations built somewhat less clearly on prior societies than did other
civilizations around 1200. Some earlier themes, such as the Bantu migration and the
, formation of large states in the Western Sudan, noted in Chapter 2, persisted. Overall,
sub-Saharan Africa remained a varied and distinctive setting; parts of it, like the port
cities of the East African coast, were drawn into new contacts with the growing world
network, but much of it retained a certain isolation or cultural autonomy. The spread of
universal faiths like Islam and Christianity was an important aspéct of African history in
this period, but much of Central and Southern Africa was relatively unaffected by these
outside influences.


--- End of Page 2 ---
| African Societies: Diversity and
ilarities

¢ were the main political and religious forms in sub-Saharan Africa, and what
ysome of the principal regional patterns?

tinent—the world’s second largest—Africa is so vast and its societies so diverse
is almost impossible to generalize about them. Differences in geography, language,
n, politics, and other aspects of life contributed to Africa’s lack of political unity
periods of time. Unlike in many parts of Asia, Europe, and North Africa, nei-
universal states nor universal religions characterized the history of sub-Saharan Af-
Yet universal religions, first Christianity and later Islam, did find adherents in Africa
‘sometimes contributed to the formation of large states and empires.”
ican societies developed diverse forms, from stateless societies organized around
ip or age sets to large centralized states, and within this diversity were many shared
of language and beliefs. Universalistic faiths penetrated the continent and served.
ie basis for important cultural developments in Nubia and Ethiopia.

¢

600 c.c. 1000 c.c. 1200 ce.

600-700 1000 1200

islam spreads across Ghana at-height of its power Rise of the empire of Mali
North Africa 1100 1260

Almoravid movement in the Death of Sundiata; earliest
Sahara stone buildings at-Zimbabwe;
Lalibela.rules in Ethiopia;
Yoruba culture fiourishes at
Hle-lfe

1300

Mali at its height; Kanem
Empire is a.rivat

1324

Pilgrimage of Mansa Musa

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 167

1400 ce.

1400

Flourishing of cities of Timbuktu
and Djenne; Ethiopian Christian
kingdom; Swahili cities flourish
on east African coast

1417, 1431

Last Chinese trade voyages to
East Africa

1500

Songhay Empire flourishes;
Benin at height of power
1400-c. 1550

Great Zimbabwe at height, gold
and international trade

1 Societies with and without States
e African societies had rulers who exercised control through a hierarchy of officials in

hat can be called states, but others were politically decentralized societies organized
d kinship or other forms of obligation and lacking the concentration of political
wer and authority we normally associate with the state. Sometimes the decentralized
‘ties were larger and more extensive than the neighboring states. Societies lacking
€ organization had forms of government, but the authority and power normally exer-
by a ruler and his court in a kingdom could be held instead by a council of families
by the community, with no need to tax the population to support the ruler, the bureau-
ts, the army, or the nobles, as was usually the case in state-building societies. Stateless
eties had little concentration of authority, and it affected only a small part of the peo-
8’ lives. In these societies, government was rarely a full-time occupation, and there
8S No political class. Such societies often were less hierarchical and more egalitarian.

~ Other alternatives to formal government were possible. Among peoples of the West
ican forest, secret societies of men and women controlled customs and beliefs and
te able to limit the authority of rulers. Especially among peoples who had sharp ri-
ies between lineages or family groupings, secret societies developed that cut across
lineage divisions. Members’ allegiance to these groups transcended their lineage ties.
Secret societies settled village disputes. They acted to maintain stability within the
“munity, and they served as an alternative to the authority of state institutions.

politically decentralized
societies

African societies organized
around kinship or other forms
of obligation and lacking the
concentration of political power
and authority associated with
formal states.

--- End of Page 3 ---
Throughout Africa many decentralized societies thrived, perhaps aided by the facy
that internal social pressures or disputes often could be resolved by allowing dissident,
to leave and establish a new village in the sparsely populated continent. Still, decen.
tralized societies found it difficult to resist external pressures, mobilize for warfare, oy.
ganize large building projects, or create stable conditions for continuous long-distance
trade with other peoples. All these needs or goals contributed to the formation of states
in sub-Saharan Africa.

State-building took place under a variety of conditions. For example, West Africa ex-
perienced both the cultural influence of Islam and its own internal developments. The
formation of some powerful states, such as Mali and Songhay, depended more on milj-
tary power and dynastic alliances than on ethnic or cultural unity. In this development
and in the process of state formation itself, Africa paralleled the roughly contemporane-
ous developments of Western Europe. The growth of city-states with strong merchant
communities in West Africa and on the Indian Ocean coast bore certain similarities to the
urban developments of Italy and Germany in this period. However, disparities between |
the technologies and ideologies of Europeans and Africans also created differences in the
ways these societies developed. That was made clear with the arrival of Europeans—the
Portuguese—in the fifteenth century whose contact drew Africans increasingly into the
world economy in ways that transformed African development in the following centuries,

7.1.2 Common Elements in African Societies

Even amid the diversity of African cultures, certain similarities in language, thought, and
religion provided some underlying unities. The spread of the Bantu-speaking peoples
provided a linguistic base across much of Africa, so that even though specific languages
differed, structure and vocabulary allowed some mutual understanding between neigh-
boring Bantu speakers. .

The same might be said of the animistic religion that characterized much of Africa.
From the continent's earliest beginnings people held a belief that a soul or spirit existed
in every object, even if it was inanimate. In a future state this soul or spirit would exist
as part of an immaterial soul. The spirit, therefore, was thought to be universal. Africans,
like Europeans, believed that some evil, disasters, and illnesses were produced by witch-
craft. Specialists were needed to combat the power of evil and eliminate the witches. This
led in many societies to the existence of a class of diviners or priests who guided reli-
gious practice and helped protect the community. Above all, African religion provided
a cosmology—a view of how the universe worked—and a guide to éthics and behavior.

Many African peoples shared an underlying belief in a creator deity whose power
and action were expressed through spirits or. lesser gods and through the founding an-
cestors of the group. The ancestors often were viewed as the first settlers and thus the
“owners” of the land or the local resources. Through them, the fertility of the land, game,
people, and herds could be ensured. Among some groups, working the land took on reli-
gious significance, so the land itself had a meaning beyond its economic usefulness.

Religion, economics, and history were thus closely intertwined. The family, lineage,
or clan around which many African societies were organized also had an important role _
in dealing with the gods. Deceased ancestors often were a direct link between their liv-
ing relatives and the spirit world. Veneration of the ancestors and gods was part of the
same system of belief. Such a system was strongly linked to specific places and people.
It showed remarkable resiliency even in the face of contact with monotheistic religions
such as Islam and Christianity.

The economies of Africa are harder to describe in general terms than some basic as-
pects of politics and culture. North Africa, fully involved in the Mediterranean and Arab
economic world, stands clearly apart. Sub-Saharan Africa varied gieatly from one region
to the next. In many areas, settled agriculture and skilled ironwork had been established

--- End of Page 4 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 169

r Fore or advanced rapidly during the postclassical period. Specialization encouraged
sive local and regional trade, the basis for many lively markets and the many large
jes that grew in both the structured states and the decentralized areas. The bustle and
ty of market life were important ingredients of African society, and women as well
en participated actively. Professional merchants, in many cases in hereditary kinship
pings, often controlled trade. Participation in international trade increased in many
gions in this period, mainly with the Islamic world and often through Arab traders. ‘
: Finally, one of the least-known aspects of early African societies is the size and dy-
ynics of their populations. This is true not only of Africa but of much of the world.
§ aeological evidence, travelers’ reports, and educated guesses are used to estimate
e population of early African societies, but in truth, our knowledge of how Africa fits
fo the general trends of the world population is very slight. By 1500, Africa may have
430 million to 60 million inhabitants. :

1.3 The Arrival of Islam in North Africa

frica north of the Sahara had long been part of the world of classical antiquity, with

tions with both Greece and Rome. Toward the end of the Roman Empire, Christianity

taken a firm hold in Mediterranean Africa, and with the rise of Islam and its sweep

oss the Maghrib or Western North Africa, and into Spain, the ties to the Mediterranean Maghrib

world became even closer. [MAH-gribb] The Arabic word for
Islam offered many attractions within Africa. Its fundamental teaching that all Western North Africa.

fuslims are equal within the community of believers made the acceptance of conquer-

; and new rulers easier. The Islamic tradition of uniting the powers of the state and

eligion in the person of the ruler or caliph appealed to some African kings as a way

af reinforcing their authority. The concept that all members of the umma, or commu-

nity of believers, were equal put the newly converted Berbers and later Africans on an

ual footing with the Arabs, at least in law. Despite these egalitarian and somewhat

pian ideas within Islam, practices differed considerably at local levels. Social stratifi-

ion remained important‘in Islamicized societies, and ethnic distinctions also divided

believers. Despite certain teachings on the equality between men and women, the

fine for killing a man was twice that for killing a woman. The disparity between law and

ctice—between equality before God and inequality within the world—sometimes led

to utopian reform movements.

7.14 The Christian Kingdoms: Nubia and Ethiopia

Islam was not the first universalistic religion to take root in Africa, and the wave of Arab
conquests across Northern Africa had left behind it islands of Christianity. Christian con-
Yerts had been made in Egypt and Ethiopia even before the conversion of the Roman
Er pire in the fourth century c.z. In addition to the Christian kingdom of Axum,
Christian communities thrived in Egypt and Nubia, farther up the Nile. The Christians
of Egypt, the Copts, developed a rich tradition in contact with Byzantium, translating
the gospels and other religious literature from Greek to Coptic, their own tongue, which
based on the language of ancient Egypt. On doctrinal and political issues, they even-
lally split from the Byzantine connection. When Egypt was conquered by Arab armies
id then converted to Islam, the Copts were able to maintain their faith; Muslim rulers
cognized them as followers of a revealed religion and thus entitled to a certain toler-
ance. The Coptic influence had already spread up the Nile into Nubia, the ancient land
9f Kush. Muslim attempts to penetrate Nubia were met with such stiff resistance in the
inth century that the Christian descendants of ancient Kush were left as independent
bristian kingdoms until the thirteenth century. "

__ The Ethiopian kingdom that grew from Axum was perhaps the most important
ican Christian outpost. Cut off from Christian Byzantium by the Muslim conquest of


--- End of Page 5 ---
Figure 7.2

This extraordinary thirteenth-century
church, Set Giorgis, represents
the power of early Christianity
in Ethiopia. It was one of a great
complex of 11 churches that
King Lalibela believed God had
commanded him to build. Dedicated
to St. George, the patron saint
of Ethiopia, it was cut out of the
bedrock of the earth. Its raof, in
the shape of an enormous cross,
lies at ground level. Although it is

* surrounded by impassable walls and
can be reached only by way of an
underground tunnel carved in stone,
it is still used for worship today.

Gilad Flesch/PhatoStock-Israel/Alamy
Stock Photo

Sahel

The northern grassland region
of sub-Saharan Africa, stretching
south of the desert.

Egypt and the Red Sea coast, surrounded by pagan neighbors, and probably influenced —
by pagan and Jewish immigrants from Yemen, the Christian kingdom turned inward. Its
people occupied the Ethiopian highlands, living in fortified towns and supporting them-
selves with agriculture on terraced hilisides. Eventually, thtough a process of warfare,
conversion, and compromise with non-Christian neighbors, a new dynasty emerged,
which under King Lalibela (d. 1221) sponsored a remarkable building project in which 11
great churches were sculpted from the rock in the town that bore his name (Figure 7.2).

In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, an Ethiopian Christian state emerged un-
der a dynasty that traced its origins back to the biblical marriage of Solomon and Sheba.
Using the Ge’ez language of Axum as a religious language and Amharic as the common
speech, this state maintained its brand of Christianity in isolation while facing constant
pressure from its increasingly Muslim neighbors.

The struggle between the Christian state in the Ethiopian highlands and the
Muslim peoples in Somalia and on the Red Sea coast shaped much of the history of
the region and continues to do so today. When one of these Muslim states, with help
from the Ottoman Turks, threatened the Ethiopian kingdom, a Portuguese expedi-
tion arrived in 1542 at Massawa on the Red Sea and turned the tide in favor of its
Christian allies. Portuguese attempts thereafter to bring Ethiopian Christianity into
the Roman Catholic Church failed, and Ethiopia remained isolated, Christian, and
fiercely independent.

7.2 Kingdoms of the Grasslands

How did the Sudanic kingdoms develop in the Sahel, and what advantages did
they have?

In the Sahel grasslands, several powerful states emerged that combined Islamic religion
and culture with local practices. The kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay and the
Hausa states were African adaptations of Islam and its fusion with African traditions.
On the edge of the desert, where several resource zones cathe together, African
states such as Ghana had already formed by the eighth century by exchanging gold
from the forests of West Africa for salt or dates from the Sahara or for goods from


--- End of Page 6 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 171

erranean North Africa.Camels, which had been introduced from Asia to the Sa-

between the first and fifth centuries c.z., had greatly improved the possibilities of

ade, but these animals, which thrived in arid and semiarid environments, could not

in the humid forest zones because of disease. Thus, the Sahel, the extensive grass-

d belt at the southern edge of the Sahara, became a point of exchange between the

4 ests to the south and North Africa—an active border area where ideas, trade, and

eople from the Sahara and beyond arrived in increasing numbers. Along the Sahel, .
ral African states developed between the trading cities, taking advantage of their

on as intermediaries in the trade. But their location on the open plains of the dry

hel also meant that these states were subject to attack and periodic droughts.

, 1 Sudanic States

4e Sudanic states that formed in the grasslands often had a patriarch or council of el- Sudanic

rs of a particular family or group of lineages as leaders. Usually these states had a __A term describing the major

ritorial core area in which the people were of the same linguistic or ethnic background, African languages spoken from

ut their power extendéd over subordinate communities. These were conquest states, Ethiopia to Senegal.

hich drew on the taxes, tribute, and military support of the subordinate areas, lineages,

ad villages. The effective control of subordinate societies and the legal or informal con-

9] of their sovereignty are the usual definition of empires. The Sudanic states of Ghana,

fali, and Songhay fit that definition (Map 7.1).

_ The rulers of these states were considered sacred and were surrounded by rituals

at separated them from their subjects. Islam was used to reinforce indigenous ideas of

hip, so that Islam became something of a royal cult. Much of the population never

yverted, and the Islamicized ruling families also drew on their traditional powers to

rtify their rule. Sundiata

Several savanna states rose among the various peoples in the Sudan. We can trace The “Lion Prince”; a member of

development and culture of two of the most important, Mali and Songhay, as exam- _ the Keita clan; created a unified

es of the fusion of Islamic and indigenous African cultures within the context of trade state that became the Mali
military expansion. Empire; died about 1260.

juula

[}00-luh] Malinke merchants;
formed small partnerships

to carry out trade throughout
Mali Empire; eventually spread
throughout much of West Africa.

2.2 The Empire of Mali and Sundiata, —
e “Lion Prince” Map 7.1 EMPIRES OF THE WESTERN SUDAN

he empire of Mali, centered between the Senegal and Niger
“ad was the creation of the Malinke peoples, who in the thir-
enth century broke away from the control of Ghana, which
as by then in decline. In Mali the old forms of kingship were
inforced by Islam. As in many of the Sudanic states, the rul-
S supported Islam by building mosques, attending public
tayers, and supporting preachers. In return, sermons to the
ithful emphasized obedience and support of the king. Mali
came a model of these Islamicized Sudanic kingdoms. The
‘nomic basis of society in the Mali Empire was agriculture.
ns was combined with an active tradition of trade in many
rod ‘ucts, although like Ghana, Mali also depended on its ac-
SS to gold-producing areas to the south. Malinke merchants, ea EAN RIC OCEAN
Fjuula, formed small partnerships and groups to carry out. |
de throughout the area. They spread beyond the borders of = Nara cones
‘empire and throughout much of West Africa. wees, sora i ae |
_ The beginning of Malinke (also called Mande, or sotzat ‘ther moor states
Mandinka or Mandingo) expansion is attributed to Sundiata
“Snietimes written Sunjata), a brilliant leader whose exploits


--- End of Page 7 ---
fie Faflil: ine mongol Age, 1ZuU-140U

griots

[grEE O, grEE ot] Professiorial
oral historians who served
as keepers of traditions and
advisors to kings within the
Mali Empire.

Timbuktu’

Port city of Mali; located just off
the flood plain on the great bend
in the Niger River; population of
50,000; contained a library and ,
university. .

were celebrated in a great oral tradition. The griots, professional oral historians who
also served as keepers of traditions and advisors to kings, began their epic histories of
Mali with Sundiata; whom they called the “Lion Prince,” or “the father of the Bright
Country,” and “the master of a hundred kings.”

After a difficult childhood, Sundiata emerged from a period of interfamily and
regional fighting to create a unified state. Oral histories ascribed to him the creation of thé
basic rules and relationships of Malinke society and the outline of the government of the
empire of Mali. Hé became the mansa, or emperor. It was said that Sundiata “divided up
the world,” which meant that he was considered the originator of social arrangements,
Sixteen clans of free people were entitled to bear arms and carry the bow and quiver
of arrows as the symbol of their status, five clans were devoted to religious duties, and
four clans were specialists such as blacksmiths and griots. Such clan arrangements were
traditional among the peoples of the savanna and had existed in ancient Ghana, but now
Sundiata was credited with their origins. Although he created the political institutions of
rule that allowed for great regional and ethnic differences in the federated provinces, he
also stationed garrisons to maintain loyalty and security. Travel was secure, and crime
was severely punished, as Ibn Battuta (1304-1368 c.r.), the Arab traveler, reported: “Of
all peoples,” he said, “the Blacks are those who most hate injustice, and their emperor
pardons none who is guilty of it.” The security of travelers and their goods was an
essential element in a state where commerce played so important a role.

Sundiata died about 1260, but his successors expanded the borders of Mali un-
til it controlled most of the Niger valley almost to the Atlantic coast. A sumptuous
court was established and hosted a large number of traders. Mali grew wealthy from
the trade. Perhaps the most famous of Sundiata’s successors was Mansa Kankan
Musa (c. 1312-1337), whose pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324 brought the attention of
the Muslim world to Mali, as was described in the beginning of this chapter. Mansa
Musa’s trip had other consequences as well. From Mecca he brought back poet and
architect Ishak al-Sahili, who came from Muslim Spain. The architect directed the
building of several important mosques, and eventually a distinctive form of Sudanic
architecture developed that made use of beaten clay. This can still be seen in the
great mosque of Djenne.

7.2.3 City Dwellers and Villagers

The cities of the Western Sudan began to resemble those of North Africa, but with a
distinctive local architectural style. The towns were commercial and often included
craft specialists and a resident foreign merchant community. The military expansion of
states such as Ghana, Mali, and later Songhay contributed to their commercial success
because the power of the state protected traders. A cosmopolitan court life developed
as merchants and scholars were attracted by the power and protection of Mali. Ma-
linke traders ranged across the Sudan and exploited their position as intermediaries.
Cities of commercial exchange flourished, such as Djenne and Timbuktu, which lay
just off the flood plain on the great bend in the Niger River. Timbuktu was reported to
have a population of 50,000, and by the fourteenth century, its great Sankore mosque
contained a library and an associated university where scholars, jurists, and Muslim
theologians studied. The book was the symbol of civilization in the Islamic world, and
it was said that the book trade in Timbuktu was the most lucrative business.

For most people in the empire of Mali and the other Sudanic states, life was not
centered on the royal court, the great mosque, or long-distance trade but rather on the
agricultural cycle and the village. Making a living from the land was the preoccupation
of most people, and about 80 percent of the villagers lived by farming. This was a diffi-
cult life. The soils of the savanna were sandy and shallow. Plows were rarely used. The
villagers were people of the hoe who looked to the skies in the spring for the first rains

--- End of Page 8 ---
remains so today.

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 173

start their planting. Rice in the river valleys, millet, sorghums, some wheat, fruits,
4 vegetables provided the basis of daily life in the village and supplied the caravan
jc. Even large farins rarely exceeded 10 acres, and most were much smaller. Clear-
and often was done communally, accompanied by feasts and competitions, but
. farms belonged to families and were worked by them. A man with two wives and
al unmarried sons could work more land than a man with one wife and a smaller
Polygamy, the practice of having multiple wives, was common in the region, .

Document

 Ofal traditions take various forms. Some are simply the
“shared stories of a family or people, but in many west African
"societies, the mastery of oral traditions is a skill practiced by
 gricts. Although today’s griots are professional musicians and
bards, historically they held important places at the courts
| of west African kingdoms. The epic of Sundiata or Sunjata
as he is called in some versions, the great ruler of Mali,
“has been passed down orally for centuries. There are many
‘versions. In the following excerpts from a version collected in
4994 among the Mande people of Guinea by David Conrad
‘with the assistance the African scholars Djobba Kamara
‘ and Lansana Magassouba, the complex mix tradition, fable,
history, and divination is apparent. [David C. Conrad, éd. and
"trans. Sunjata. A New Prose Version (Indianapolis: Hackett
" Publishing, 2016), pp. 118-121.] In the preservation of these
epics the role of the griots, the professional bards who are
‘the depositors of the past play an essential role to preserve
‘the memory of great kings and great events, because as they
believed, knowing the past would help to understand the
"future. Their aim is to instruct and entertain. The griots do
| not believe that written history is better than the narrative that
| “they express with the depth and feeling of the human voice.
| As some of them argue, great prophets did not write their
| Message, but their words were no less true.
‘ The following excerpt describes a maior battle fought by
_ Sundiata, the founder of the Mali empire against the forces
of Sumaworo, king of the Sosos, who had taken control of
| Mali while Sundiata was in exile, and who was often called
| an evil sorcerer in versions of these. epics. Sundiata was
accompanied by a major ally named Fakoli, the king of a
Neighboring kingdom, himself a powerful sorcerer, and the
_ founder of many blacksmith lineages and thus associated
: with the importance of iron weapons and tools. Note here the
interweaving of family rivalry and politics, competitive claims
| of family association with the kingdom, and with origins in
_ Arabia and thus by implication with Islam, the celebration of
4 Sundiata’s prowess, and the high value placed on horses and
| thus cavalry, the key to military power in the savanna.

The Great Oral Tradition and the Epic of Sundiata

The two rivals meet. Sumaworo, who is older, challenges
Sunjata’s claims to rule and denigrates him as an upstart
youngster.

..the Mande people seem to think you are their mansa
{king], and it is true that you would not be here if you did not
have some power, but that power will do no good against
me. | told you before. . . that if the Mande people.sent you to
fight against me, you should refuse. As you now know | have
become like hot ashes surrounding Manden and Soso; any
toddler who tries to cross me will be burned up to his thighs.
And yet you are here.

{Sunjata responded] Ah, father Sumaworo, as | told you,
this is my father’s home, not yours. You are not from here.
Your father came from Folonegbe; your father was a latecomer
to Manden. You are only the second generation of your people
in Manden, but we [the Keita clan] have been here for eight
generations: our ancestor Mamadi Kani first came here from
Hejaji [Hejaz]

The battle then began:

The two armies were waiting. Soso on one side, Manden
on the other. Everybody was watching the commanders on
the battlefield. Fakoli stood off one side of Sunjata; Turama’an
[another general] on the other. Sumaworo was also flanked
by his men.

Sunjata, Sumaworo, and their men dashed across the
field and up the hill. Near the top of the hill, they faded from

sight; even as the dust disappeared. Soon they reached -:

the edge of a very deep ravine. Gathering all her strength,
Sunjata’s [magical] mare jumped the ravine and landed on the
other side. When Sumaworo’s horse tried to jump the ravine, it
tumbied to the bottom. Fakoli and Turama’an—~whose horses
safely jumped the ravine—turned and, with Sunjata, went to
look down at Sumaworo who was trapped at the bottom of
the ravine.

Sunjata called down, “Sumaworo, what is the matter?”

*,..Kill me here; do not carry me to the town. Do not bring
such shame on me. God controls all time. Please do not take
me back.”

--- End of Page 9 ---
PW He minigun rage, HOU ru

Sunjata said, “I am not going to finish*you off. No one
can climb out of that ravine; you’re stuck. . . Turning to his
companions he said, “Come, let’s gohome.” «x

They had gone some distance when Fakoli made a
decision, turned and went back to the ravine... . Taking his axe
from his shoulder, Fakoli struck Sumaworo on the head, poh!

He said, “This will be mentioned in Ma‘an Sunjata’s praise
song.” [And he was right] Though we sing, “Head-breaking
Mari Jata [an honorary title for Sundiata] it was really Fakoli
who broke Sumaworo’s head. . .

According to the Griot, Fakoli returned three times to
strike Sumaworo, each blow adding to the praise song of
Sunjata and of his victory. Sunjata and his men returned home
and as the epic celebrates “laughter returned to manden and

eventually Soso joined in” as Sunjata began to organize an,
reform the new unified Mali empire.

SOURCE: Sunjata: A New Prose Version, edited and translated by David 0,
Conrad, Copyright © 2016 by Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. Reprinted by
permission of Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. All rights reserved.

Review Questions:

1. Can oral traditions be used like other sources?

2. Even if they are not entirely true, do they have historical
value?

3. Judging from this epic, how did people of the Sudan
define the qualities of a king?

4, What aspects of the epic reveal contacts between this”
part of Africa and the wider world?

Songhay

{sohng-HEYE] Successor state
to Mali; dominated middle
reaches of Niger valley; formed
as independent kingdom under
a Berber dynasty; capital at Gao;
reached imperial status under
Sunni Ali (r. 1464-1492).

Muhammad the Great
Islamic ruler of the mid-
sixteenth century; extended
the boundaries of the Songhay
Empire.

the

Given the difficulties of the soil, the periodic droughts, insect pests, storage Pprob-
lems, and the limitations of technology, the farmers of the Sudanic states—by the meth-
ods of careful cultivation, crop rotation, and, in places such as Timbuktu, the use of
irrigation—were able to provide for their people the basic foods that supported them and
the imperial states en which they were based. The hoe and the bow became symbols of
the common people of the savanna states.

7.24 The Songhay Kingdom ,

As the power of Mali began to wane,.a successor state from within the old empire was
already beginning to emerge. The people of Songhay dominated the middle areas of the
Niger valley. Traditionally, the society of Songhay was made up of “masters of the soil,”
that is, farmers and herders; and “masters of the waters,” or fishers. Songhay had begun
to form in the seventh century as an independent kingdom, perhaps under a Berber dy-
nasty. By 1010, a capital was established at Gao on the Niger River, and the rulers had be-
come Muslims, although the majority of the population remained pagan. Dominated by
Mali for a while, by the 1370s Songhay had established its independence again and began —
to thrive as new sources of gold from the West African forests began to pass through its
territory. Gao became a large city with a resident foreign merchant gommunity and sev-
eral mosques. Under a dynamic leader, Sunni Ali (r. 164-1492), the empire of Songhay
was forged.

. Sunni Ali was a great tactical commander and a ruthless leader. His cavalry ex-
panded the borders and seized the traditional trading cities of Timbuktu and Djenne. The
middle Niger valley fell under his control, and he developed a system of provincial ad-
ministration to mobilize recruits for the army and rule the far-flung conquests. Although
apparently a Muslim, he met any challenge to his authority, even when it came from the
Muslim scholars of Timbuktu, whom he persecuted. A line of Muslim rulers who took
the military title askia succeeded him. These rulers, especially Muhammad the Great;
extended the boundaries of the empire so that by the mid-sixteenth century Songhay:
dominated the central Sudan. |

Life in the Songhay Empire followed many of the patterns established in the previ?
ous savanna states. The fusion of Islamic and pagan populations and traditions contin"
ued. Muslim clerics and jurists sometimes were upset by the pagan beliefs and practices
that continued among the population, and even more by the local interpretation of
Islamic law. They wanted to impose a strict interpretation of the law of Islam and were
shocked that men and women mixed freely in the markets and streets, and that women
went unveiled.

--- End of Page 10 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 175

gnghay remained the dominant power in the region until the end of the sixteenth
In 1591, a Muslim army from Morocco, equipped with muskets, crossed the
nd defeated the vastly larger forces of Songhay. This sign of weakness stimu-
ternal revolts against the ruling family, and eventually the parts of the old empire

ay.
ie demise of the Songhay imperial structure did not mean the end of the political
tural tradition of the Western Sudan. Other states that combined Muslim and pa-
ditions rose among the Hausa peoples of Northern Nigeria, based on cities such Hausa
o and Katsina. The earliest Muslim ruler of Kano took control in the late four- _ Peoples of present-day Northen
century and turned the city into a center of Muslim learning. In Kano and.other _ Nigeria; formed states following
cities of the region, an urbanized royal court in a fortified capital ruled over the _ the demise of Songhay Empire
tic villages, where the majority of the population lived. With powerful cavalry that combined Muslim and
ses these states extended their rule and protected their active trade in salt, grains, and Pagan traditions.
q Although these later Islamicized African states tended to be small, and their goals
local, they reproduced many of the social, political, and religious forms of the great
es of the grasslands..
Be yond the Sudan, Muslim penetration came in various forms. Merchants became es-
ed in most of the major trading cities, and religious communities developed in each

ies, occupational groups, free people, and slaves. Intermarriage often took place, but
m-influence varied widely from region to region. Nevertheless, families of traders
eages that became known as specialists in Muslim law spread widely through

2 5° Political and Social Life in the Sudanic States

can generalize from these brief descriptions of Mali and Songhay about the nature
the Sudanic states. The village communities, clans, and various ethnic groups contin-

up and often of a dominant family. Many states pointed to the immigrant origins of
tuling families, and in reality the movement and fusion of populations were constant
ures in the Sudan. Islam provided a universalistic faith that served the interests of
Ay groups. Common religion and law provided solidarity and trust to the therchants
6 lived in the cities and whose caravans brought goods to and from the savanna. The
g families used Islamic titles, such as emir or caliph, to reinforce their authority, and
) surrounded themselves with literate Muslim advisors and scribes, who aided in
ernment administration. The Muslim concept of a ruler who united civil and reli-
authority reinforced traditional ideas of kingship. It is also important to note that
Africa, as elsewhere in the world, the formation of states heightened social differences
‘made these societies more hierarchical.

Jn all the Sudanic states, Islam was fused with the existing traditions and beliefs.
ship and authority were still based on the ability to intercede with local spirits, and
ugh Sundiata and Sunni Ali were nominally Muslim, they did not ignore the tradi-
Nal basis of their rule. For this reason, Islam in these early stages in the Sudan tended
ccommodate pagan practice and belief. Large proportions of the populations-of Mali
Songhay never converted to Islam, and those who did convert often maintained
Y of the old beliefs as well. .

--- End of Page 11 ---
1/6 Part Il: The Mongot Age, 1200-1450

We can See this fusion of traditions clearly in the position of women. Several Sudani
societies were matrilineal, and some recognized the role of women within the lines 4

Sharia kinship, contrdfy to the normal patrilineal customs inscribed in the Sharia, or Islamj
[sha rEE 4] Islamic law; defined, _ law. As in the case of Songhay, North African visitors to the Sudan were shocked by
among other things, the easy familiarity between men and women and the freedom enjoyed by women.
patrilineal nature of Islamic Finally, slavery and the slave trade between Black Africa and the rest of the Islam
inheritance. world had a major impact on women and children in these societies. Various forms

slavery and dependent labor had existed in Africa before Islam was introduced. Althou
we know little about slavery in Central Africa in this period, slavery had been a margi
aspect of the Sudanic states. Africans had been enslaved by others before, and Nubi
(African) slaves had been known in the classical world, but with the Muslim conquest
of North Africa and commercial penetration to the south, slavery became a more wid
diffused phenomenon, and a slave trade in Africans developed on a new scale.

In theory, Muslims viewed slavery as a stage in the process of conversion—a way
preparing pagans to become Muslims—but in reality, conversion did not guarantee free:
dom. Slaves in the Islamic world were used in a variety of occupations, as domestic ser.
vants and laborers, but they were also used as soldiers and administrators who, having
no local ties and affiliations, were considered to be dependent on and thus trustworth
by their masters. Slaves were also used as eunuchs and concubines, hence the emphasi
on enslaving women and children. The trade caravans from the Sahel across the Sahar;
often transported slaves as well as gold, and as we shall see, other slave trade routes de-
veloped from the African interior to the East African coast.

Frequently the children of slave mothers were freed and integrated into Muslim
society. Although this custom was positive in one sense, it also meant a constant des
mand for more slaves to replace those who had been freed. Estimates of the volume of
the trans-Saharan slave trade vary widely. One scholar places the total at 4.8 million,
with another 2.4 million sent to the Muslim ports on the Indian Ocean coast. Actual)
figures may have been considerably lower, but the trade extended over 700 years and
affected a large area. It was one more way in which Islamic civilization changed sub-

Saharan Africa.

Visualizing the Past
The Architecture of Faith

The spread of Islam eventually created spiritual,
commercial, and cultural bonds between West Africa and
the Middle East and especially between North Africa and
Spain. The process of Islam’s expansion and its local
adaptation is apparent in the distinctive architectural
style of West African mosques. Built usually -of clay,
incorporating wood beams for support and decoration,
with a mirab tower and an open courtyard, these places
of worship created spaces of simple elegance with local
materials that reflect ethnic and regional differences. West
African mosques vary considerably from the traditional
patterns of the Middle East and South Asia. Mosques,
like the simple buildings among the Dogon people or the
elaborate Sankoré mosque at Timbuktu begun in 1324 by
Mansa Musa and later the center of a university, reflect the
integration of Islam into African life.

Dogon village mosque in Kani-Kombole, Mali, West Africa.

Bombaert Patrick/Alamy Stock Photo


--- End of Page 12 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 177

Review Questions:

1. The architectural styles of West African mosques differ
from the classic models of the Middle East. In what way
does that suggest that Islam’s entry to the region was
gradual and transmitted by merchants and traders?

2. In what ways do the mosques of West Africa reflect local
conditions and practices?

3. What functions beside prayer did mosques play, and how
did their construction tie West Africa to the wider world?

D had Middle Eastern mosques shown in the skyline of Yazd, Iran.

igor Alyukov/Shutterstock

a

3 The Swahili Coast of East Africa

y integrated into international commerce were the cities of East Africa, and why?

the thirteenth century, a string of urbanized East African trading ports had developed
g thie coast. These towns shared the common Bantu-based and Arabic-influenced
‘which means “coastal”) language and other cultural traits, although they were
ed by separate Muslim ruling families. Towns’such as Mogadishu, Mombasa, Ma-
Kilwa, Pate, and Zanzibar eventually contained mosques, tombs, and palaces of cut
and coral. Ivory, gold, iron, slaves, and exotic animals were exported from these
is in exchange for silks from Persia and porcelain.from China for the ruling Muslim
ilies. The Arab traveler Ibn Battuta was impressed with the beauty and refinement
hese towns. He described Kilwa as “one of the most beautiful and ‘well constructed
ns in the world” and was also impressed by the pomp and luxury of its ruler. Kilwa’s
antage was its access to the gold coming from the interior and the fact that it was the
Hthest point south from which the ships sailing from India could hope to return in a
igle Monsoon season.
From the thirteenth to the fifteenth centuries, Kilwa flourished in the context of in-
National trade, but it was not alone; about 30 of these port towns eventually dotted the
(Map 7.2). They were tied to each other by an active coastal commerce and, in a few
ces, to the interior by a caravan trade, although it was usually Africans who brought
00ds to the coast. Some Chinese ports sent goods directly to Africa in the thirteenth
Mury, and as late as 1417 and 1431, large state-sponsored expeditions sailing directly
m China stopped at the East African coast to load ivory,-gold, and rare woods. The
‘inese discontinued such contact after 1431, and goods.from China came-to the coast
reafter in the ships of Arab or Indian traders.

3.1 The Mixture of Cultures on the Swahili Coast

© Islamic influence in these towns promoted long-distance commerce. The thirteenth
“ury was a period of great Islamic expansion, and as that faith spread eastward to India
4 Indonesia, it provided a religious bond of trust and law that facilitated trade through-
ports of the Indian Ocean. The ruling families in the East African trading ports built
*ques and palaces; the mosque at Mogadishu was begun in, 1231. Many of these ruling
es claimed to be descendants of immigrants from Shiraz, in Persia—a claim intended
legitimize their position and orthodoxy. In fact, some evidence indicates that the original

--- End of Page 13 ---
178 Part li: The Mongoi Age, 1200-1450

Map 7.2 THE SWAHILI COAST; AFRICAN MONSOON

ROUTES AND MAJOR TRADE ROUTES

(Fieenge
se Riogdetishu
5, \%/ Barawa
i

INDIAN
OCEAN

igeat®

5S

As important as the Islamic impact was on the societies of the savanna and the East
African coast, other African peoples in the continent's interiér and in the forests of
West Africa were following their own trajectories of development. We must emphasize
that African societies were diverse. By 1000 c.8., most of these societies were based on

7.4 Peoples of the Forest and Plains

What kinds of political organization developed in Central and Southern Africa?

Muslim families had emigrated to the Somali coast ang
from there to other towns farther south. The institutions
and forms of the Muslim world operated in these cities,
Whereas the rulers and merchants tended to be Muslim, the
majority of the population on the East African coast, and
perhaps even in the towns themselves, retained their previ.
ous beliefs and culture.

African culture remained strong throughout the area,
Swahili was essentially a Bantu language containing a large
number of Arabic words, although many of these words
were not incorporated until the sixteenth century. The lan-
guage was written in an Arabic script some time before the -
thirteenth century; the ruling families could also converse
in Arabic. Islam itself penetrated very little into the inte.
rior among the hunters, pastoralists, and farmers. Even the
areas of the coast near the trading towns remained largely
unaffected. In the towns, the mud and thatch houses of the
non-Muslim common peoples surrounded the stone and
coral buildings of the Muslim elite. Islamization was to some
extent class-based. Still, a culture developed that fused Is-
lamic and traditional elements. For example, family lineage
was traced both through the maternal line, which controlled
property (the traditional African practice), and through the
paternal line, as was the Muslim custom. Swahili culture
was a dynamic hybrid, and the Swahili people spread their
Janguage and culture along the coast of East Africa.

By the time the Portuguese arrived on this coast
around 1500, the Swahili culture was widely diffused.
Kilwa was no longer the predominant city, and the fo-
cus of trade had shifted to Malindi and Mombasa on the
Kenya coast, but the commerce across the Indian Ocean
continued. Eventually, the Portuguese raided Kilwa and
Mombasa in an attempt to take control of trade. Their out-
post on Mozambique and their control of Sofala put much
of the gold trade in their hands. Although the Portuguese
built a major outpost at Fort Jesus in Mombasa in 1592,
they were never able to control the trade on the Northern
Swahili coast. The East African patterns, as established by
1500, persisted even more than those of the Sudanic king-
doms. In some areas like the Swahili coast and the West
African savanna, Islam became a dominant cultural force.
In other areas such as the forest region of West Africa,
Muslims remained a minority, and in other areas like the
Central African forests, Islam hardly penetrated at all.


--- End of Page 14 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 179

ried agriculture, sometimes combined with herding, and
{societies used iron tools and weapons. Many were still
nized in small village communities. In various places,
eryer, states had formed. Some of them began to resolve the
slems of integrating large territories under a single govern-
tand ruling subject peoples. Whereas Egypt, Kush, and
pia had developed writing, and other areas borrowed
Arabic script, many sub-Saharan African societies were
Hterate and transmitted their knowledge, skills, and tradi-
yy oral methods and direct instruction. The presence or
of writing has often been used as a measure of civiliza-
-by Western observers, but as in pre-Columbian Peru, var-
; African societies made great strides in the arts, building,
statecraft, sometimes in the context of highly urbanized
s, without a system of writing. .
cross Central Africa, kingdoms developed that were sup-
by complex agratian societies capable of great artistic
ievements. At Benin, in the Kongo, in the Yoruba city-
s, and at Great Zimbabwe, royal authority—often consid-
divinely inspired—ted to the creation of powerful states

sure 7.3).

Figure 7.3

{1 Artists and Kings: Yoruba
Benin

Yoruba peoples, who spoke a non-Bantu language, were or-
ed in small city-states, each controlling a radius of perhaps
s. The Yoruba were highly urbanized, although many
e town inhabitants farmed in the surrounding country-
These city-states developed under the strong authority of
kings, who were considered divine. A vast royal court
included secondary wives, musicians, magicians, and body-

of soldier-slaves surrounded the king. His rule was not _Cfowned head of a member of a ruling family of Ife, in present-
, however. We can use the example of the Yoruba state of day Nigeria, sculpted of metal in the fourteenth or early fifteenth
9, which had emerged by the fourteenth century. Its king, the century. Ife was a city-state formed by the Yoruba people.

drawn from local lineages, who were allowed to exercise
ditional rule as long as they continued to pay tribute to Oyo. In the capital, a council
te, made up of nobles from the seven city districts, advised the ruler and limited his
ver, and the Ogboni, or secret society of religious and political leaders, reviewed deci-
of the king and the council. The union of civil and supernatural powers in the person
he ruler was the basis of power. The highly urbanized nature of Yoruba society and the
ishing of artisan traditions within these towns bear some similarity to those of the city-
fes of medieval Italy or Germany. The remarkable terra-cotta and bronze portrait heads
past rulers were produced in the period after 1200 c.z. by Yoruba artists; their lifelike
ality and the skill of their execution are among the greatest achievements of African art.
Patterns similar to those in the Yoruba city-states could be found among Edo peoples
the east of Yoruba. A large city-state called Benin was formed sometime in the four-
et uth century. Under Ewuare the Great (r. 1440-1473), Benin’s control extended from the
et River to the coast near modern Lagos. Benin City was described by early European
tors in the sixteenth century as a city of great population and broad ayenues. The oba,
ler, lived in a large royal compound surrounded by a great entourage, and his au-
ity was buttressed by ritual and ceremony.

aw ive/Briti i
fin, contr : at in - _ Werner Forman Archive/British Museum, London/Heritage Image
n, ‘olled subject peoples through “princes” in the prov: Partnership Ltd/Alamy Stock Phote

Benin

Powerful city-state (in present-
day Nigeria) that came into
contact with-the Portuguese in
1485 but remained relatively
free of European influence;
important commercial and
political entity until the
nineteenth century.

--- End of Page 15 ---
180 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Thinking Historically

Two Transitions in the History of World Population

Africa and the ancient Americas are two regions that make
clear the difficulty of establishing the past size and structure
of populations. Estimates based on fragmentary sources,
the amount of available resources, and analysis of agricultural
or hunting techniques have been used as rough guesses
about population size. The results often are inadequate
or controversial, but historians believe that the question
is important. Demography, the. study of population, has
increasingly become a valued tool of historical inquiry. Clearly,
unless we know the size, density, age structure, health,
and reproductive capacity of a population, it is difficult to
understand many aspects of its society, politics, and economy.
In the contemporary world, most nations conduct periodic
censuses to assess the present situation of their populations
and to plan for the future. Before the mid-eighteenth
century, when census-taking became a regular procedure,
population estimates and counts were sporadic and usually
inaccurate. Estimating populations in the past, especially in
nonliterate societies, is a highly speculative exercise in which
archeological evidence and estimates of productive capacity
of agricultural practices and technology are used. The earliest
date for a population estimate with a margin of error less than
20 percent is probably 1750.

The history of human demography can be divided into.

two basic periods: a long era—almost all of human history—
of very slow growth and a very short period—about 275
years, from 1750 to the present—of very rapid growth. For
most of this history, the human population was very small
and grew very slowly. Before agriculture was developed, the
hunting-and-gathering economies of the world’s populations
supported 5 million to 10 million people, if modern studies
of such populations can be used as a guide. After about
8000 B.c.c., when plants and animals were domesticated,
there was a first demographic transition as population
began to increase more rapidly but still at a modest level.
Agriculture provided a more secure and larger food supply,
but population concentration in villages and towns may have
made people more susceptible to disease and thus reduced
their numbers. Other historians believe that the settled
agricultural life also led to intensified warfare (because
of the struggle for land and water) and increasing social
stratification within societies.

Still, the Neolithic Revolution and the development of
agriculture stimulated population growth. It was the first
major transition in the history of world population. One
estimate, based on Roman and Chinese population counts
and some informed guesses about the rest of the world, is
an annual growth rate of about 0.36 per million. By 1 c.£., the

, often is associated with the Industrial Revolution, when new

.France, these two transitions took place at about the same

world population may have been about 300 million peopte. |
increased between 1 ¢.£. and 1750 c.£. to about 500 millio
people. We should bear in mind that during this period
general increase, there were always areas that suffer
decline—sometimes drastic—because of wars, epidemics
or natural catastrophes. The disastrous decline of Ameri
Indian populations after contact with Europeans, caused b
disease, conquest, and social disruption, is a case in point
The effect of the slave trade on Africa, although still debated,
is another. Sharp population changes usually resulted j
profound social and cultural adjustments. Some scholars
argue that the slave trade had just such an impact on soci
and political patterns in Africa.

A second and extremely important transition tool
place between the mid-seventeenth and the mid-eighteenth
centuries. Initially based on new food resources, this transition

sources of energy were harnessed. The growth rate greatly
increased during this period in the countries most affected)
Between 1750 and 1800, the world population grew at a rate
of more than 4 percent a year to more than a billion people. B
the mid-twentieth century, the world growth rate had tripled,
and by 2012, the world population had risen to more than
billion. }

This demographic transition took place first in Europ
and is still more characteristic of the developed world. Most
premodern agrarian economies were characterized by. 4@
balance between the annual number of births and deaths;
both were high. Life expectancy usually was less than 35
years, and the high mortality was compensated by high
fertility; that is, women had many ctildren. Improvements in
medicine, hygiene, diet, and the’ general standard of living
contributed to a decrease in mortality in the eighteerith
century. This allowed populations to begin to grow at a faster
rate. By the nineteenth century in most of Western Europe,
the decline in mortality was followed by a decline in ferti ity
brought about by contraception. In some countries such as

time, so population growth was limited. In much of Europe,
however, the decline in fertility lagged behind the decrease in
mortality, so there was a period of rapid population growth.
Until the 1920s, population growth in Western Europe and
the United States was higher than in the rest of the world,
especially in the less industrialized countries. In recent times,
that situation has been reversed. But many other societies
have now experienced a demographic. transition.

Some demographers believe that demographic transition
is part of the process of shifting from a basically agrarian society

--- End of Page 16 ---
t 5 an industrial, urbanized one and that the improvements
PR redicine, technology, and higher standards of living will
secessarily result in a change to a modern demographic
structure. They believe that a decreasing need for children as
of the family economic unit, laws against child labor, and
intervention in family planning will eventually lower the
yorid birth rate and decrease the pressure of population on
conomic growth. This assumption remains to be proved, and
fesponses may vary greatly from one region of the world to
snother because of economic conditions and cultural attitudes
about proper family size.

Finally, we should also note that responses to
ographic transition can vary greatly according, to historical
conditions. in the eighteenth and nineteenth
enturies, Europe resolved the problem of

may indicate that the process is continuing.

- Still, it is clear that a demographic
transition is well advanced in many parts of Latin America
and Asia and is beginning to take hold in Africa. Mortality
las dropped very rapidly since 1950 because of moderh

‘a single example, in Sri Lanka the mortality rate was almost
gt in half between 1945 and 1952 simply by eliniinating

in Asia and Latin Ametica, but in Africa, where’ children
continue to have an important economic and social role in the
extended family, it remains high. It is difficult to project what
demographic transitions will take place in these areas of the
world. However, all countries are faced with the problem of

At present, the world’s

medical technology, and life expectancy has doubled. To cite

malarial mosquitoes. Fertility has declined in many places.

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 181

balancing their population’s growth against the ability of the
society to feed and provide an adequate standard of living to
the people.

At present, the world’s population is growing because
of a moderate rate of growth in the industrialized nations
and a high rate in the developing countries. In the 1970s,
demographer Ansley Coale pointed out that the rate of
growth, about 2 percent a year, is 100 times greater than it
had been for most of human history. At this ‘rate the world’s
population would be multiplied by 1,000 every 350 years. The
results of such growth would be disastrous. Coale concluded
that the present period of growth is transitory. Some people
who are concerned with rapid Population growth believe
that the solution is to limit’ population
growth in the developing nations by state

opulation growth with an, enormous wave Population is growing intervention, like China’s policy of limiting
of emigration to the Americas, Australia, because of a moderate the number of children per family or
and_ various colonies around the globe. rate of growth in the through incentives to have smaller families
?P resent-day political circumstances make industrialized nations and education about birth control. Others
this solution less possible, although thenew anda high rate in the believe that a redistribution of resources
waves of migration in the global economy developing countries. from rich nations to poor nations would

alleviate the human misery created by
population pressure and eventually lead
to political and social conditions that would contribute to a
gradual lowering of the birth rates. Clearly, demographic
questions must always be set in political, economic, and
social contexts.

Review Questions:
1. Why do nations differ in their need to contro! population
growth?
2. Why has the rate of population growth varied in different
areas of the world?
3. Is overpopulation essentially a biological, social, or
political problem?

“ sohtact with outsiders (Figure 7.4).

at authority was also the theme of the magnificent artistic output in ivory and cast
ize that became characteristic of Benin. Celebration of the powers and majesty of the
al lineage as well as objects for the rituals surrounding kingship were the stibjects of
of this art. When the first Europeans, the Portuguese, visited Benin in the 1480s,
y were impressed by the power of the ruler and the extent of his territory. Similarly,
Partists of Benin were impressed with the Portuguese, and Benin bronzes and ivories
to include representations of Portuguese soldiers and other themes that reflected

demography
The study of population.

demographic transition

Shift to low birth rate, low infant
death rate, stable population;
first emerged in Western Europe
and the United States in the late
nineteenth century.

42 The Kingdoms of Kongo and Mwene Mutapa

antu migrations discussed in Chapter 2 had brought millions of farming and herd-
ples into Central and Southern Africa from their original homelands in Nigeria. In
us places they replaced kinship-based societies with new political structures based
Singship supported by ideas of hereditary royal lineages and a Kind of bureaucracy.
Me of these became powerful states. Beginning about the thirteenth century, another


--- End of Page 17 ---
182 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 7.4

kingdom was forming on the lower Congo River. By the
late fifteenth century this kingdom, Kongo, was flour
ishing. On a firm agricultural base, its people also de.
veloped the skills of weaving, pottery, blacksmithing
and carving. Individual artisans, skilled in the working
of wood, copper, and iron, were highly esteemed. There
was a sharp division of labor between men and women
Men took responsibility for clearing the forest and scrub,
producing palm oil and palm wine, building houses,
hunting, and long-distance trade. Women took chatge
of cultivation in all its aspects, the care of domestic an-
imals, and household duties. On the seacoast, women
made salt from seawater, and they also collected the
seashells that served as currency in the Kongo kingdom,
The population was distributed in small family-based
villages and in towns. The area around the capital,
Mbanza Kongo, had a population of 60,000 to 100,000 by
the early sixteenth century.

The kingship of the Kongo was hereditary but local
chieftainships were not, and this gave the central author-
ity power to control subordinates. In a way, the Kongo
kingdom was a confederation of smaller states brought
under the control of the manikongo, or king, and by the
fifteenth century it was divided into eight major prov-
inces. The word mani means “blacksmith,” and it demon-
strated the importance of iron and the art of working it

Bronze plaque of Oba and retainers. African rulers often negotiated with
the Portuguese on equal terms and incorporated them into local political
and commercial networks. In this plaque, the presence of Portuguese

retainers—the helmeted figures armed with muskets on each side of the

in its association with political and ritual power.

Farther to the east, another large Bantu confedera-
tion developed among the farming and cattle-herding
Shona-speaking peoples in the region between the

main figure’s head—were marks of the Oba's power.

Zambezi and Limpopo rivers. Beginning in the ninth

Werner Forman Archive/Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin/Heritage Image Partnership

Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo

Kongo

Kingdom, based on agriculture,
formed on lower Congo River by
late fifteenth century; capital
at Mbanza Kongo; ruled by
hereditary monarchy.

Great Zimbabwe

Bantu confederation of Shona-
speaking peoples located
between the Zambezi and
Limpopo rivers; developed after
ninth century; featured royal
courts built of stone; created
centralized state by fifteenth
century; king took title of
Mwene Mutapa.

century C.z., migrants from the west began to build
royal courts in stone, to which later immigrants added
more polished constructions. There were many of these
zimbabwe, or stone house, sites (about 200 have been found) that housed local rulers and
subchiefs, but the largest site, called Great Zimbabwe, was truly impressive (Figure 7.5).
It was the center of the kirigdom and had a religious importance, associated with the bird
of God, an eagle that served as a link between the world and the spirits. The symbol of the
bird of God is found at the ruins of Great Zimbabwe and throughout the area of its con-
trol. Great Zimbabwe (not to be confused with the modem nation of Zimbabwe) included
several structures, some with strong stone walls 15 feet thick and 30 feet high, a large con
ical tower, and extensive cut-stone architecture made without the use of mortar to join the
bricks together. Observers in the nineteenth century suspected that Phoenicians or Arabs
had built these structures, mostly because their prejudices prevented them from believing
that Africans were capable of erecting such buildings, but archeologists have established
that a Bantu kingdom had begun construction in stone by the eleventh century c.z. and
had done its most sophisticated building in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.

By the fifteenth century, a centralized state ruled from Great :Zimbabwe had begun
to form. It controlled a large portion of the interior of Southeast Africa all the way to the
Indian Ocean. Under a king who took the title Mwene Mutapa (which the Portuguese latet
pronounced “Monomotapa”), this kingdom experienced a’short period of rapid expan-
sion in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Its dominance over the sources of gold
in the interior eventually gave it great advantages in commerce, which it developed with


--- End of Page 18 ---
: celain unearthed by archeologists at Great Zimbabwe. By the sixteenth century, inter-
il divisions and rebellion had split the kingdom apart, and perhaps an emphasis on cat-
as a symbol of wealth led to soil exhaustion. Control of the gold fields still provided a

ce of power and trade. Representatives of the Mwene Mutapa called.at the east coast
to buy Indian textiles, and their regal bearing and fine iron weapons impressed the

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 183

Figure 7.5

Great Zimbabwe was one of several
stone settlement complexes in
Southeastern Africa. Added to at
different times, it served as the
royal court of the kingdom. in

their search for traces of the non-
African peopie they believed “must”
have built these massive stone
structures, European explorers

and treasure-seekers stripped the
site of layers of artifacts that might
have told more of the story of Great
Zimbabwe.

Nick Greaves/Images of Africa
Photobank/Alamy Stock Photo

Europeans who saw them. As late as the nineteenth century, a much smaller king-
of Mwene Mutapa survived in the interior and provided some leadership against
uopean encroachment, but pastoralism had come to play a central role in the lives of

‘Shona people who descended from the great tradition.

q

" Developments in sub-Saharan Africa during the centuries
after 1200 featured a mixture of internal changes, including
_ the spread of strong states in several regions, along with the
~ ifitensification of contacts, particularly with North Africa and
the Middle East. Contacts did not extend, however, to direct
interactions with the Mongols: In this respect African history
after 1200 differed from patterns in much of Asia and Europe,
Where the Mongols and their impact had such profound
" effects. African products did reach the Mongols—for exampie,
through the export of decorative feathers—but only through
the efforts of Arab traders. Africans themselves were not
involved and were not challenged to reconsider their military
fe. and political patterns or their commercial outreach, to the
_ Same extent as Asia or Europe.

This chapter has concentrated on the Sudanic states
and the Swahili coast, where the impact of Islam was the

Global Connections and Central Themes
5 Internal Development and Global Contacts

most profound and where, because of the existence of
written sources, it is somewhat easier to reconstruct the
region’s history. Sub-Saharan Africa had never been totally
isolated fron the Mediterranean world or other outside
contacts, but the spread of Islam obviously brought large
areas of Africa into more intensive contact with the global
community, even though Africa remained something of an .
Islamic frontier. Still, the fusion of Islamic and indigenous
African cultures created a synthesis that restructured the
life of many Africans. Sudanic kingdoms and the Swahili
coast participated in extensive borrowing and interactions
with North Africa and the Middle East, similar to imitation
efforts by several other societies in the postclassical period.
Islamic contacts were also heavily involved in the growing
integration of several parts of sub-Saharan Africa with
global.trade.


--- End of Page 19 ---
184 Part li: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Although the arrival of Islam in Africa in the period from
800 to 1500 was clearly a major event, it would be wrong to
see Africa's history in this period exclusively in terms of the
Islamic impact. Great Zimbabwe and the Kongo kingdom,
to cite only two examples, represented the development of
Bantu concepts of kingship and state-building independently
of trends taking place elsewhere on the continent. Similar
processes and accomplishments could also be seen in
Benin and among the Yoruba of West Africa. Meanwhile in

Ethiopia, East Africa, and the Eastern Sudan, the impact of -

Christianity and the pre-Islamic Mediterranean world had been
long felt. The dynamic relationship between the impact of the
civilizations and peoples external to Afrida and the processes
ot development within the continent itself was a major theme
in Africa’s history.
Developments in Africa had their own special chara-
* teristics, and of course quite varied patterns emerged. The
Sudanic kingdoms, however, warrant particular comparison
with several other regions during the postclassical pertod. They
showed the capacity to organize large, although fairly loosely
structured, states, They expanded trade and cultural contacts

with other civilization centers, particularly in North Africa
and the Middle East. They imitated aspects of their contag
societies, though quite selectively. They clearly formed a vita,
part of the expansion of transregional trade, while constructing
their own reactions to the other great theme of the period, the
spread of world religions.

: By the late fifteenth century, when the first European,
the Portuguese, began to arrive on the west and east coa
of Africa, in many places they found well-developed, powerfyj
kingdoms that were able to deal with the Portuguese as equals
This was even truer in the parts of Africa that had come under
the influence of Islam and through it had established links
with other areas of Muslim civilization. In this period, Africa
had increasingly become part of the general cultural trends of
the wider world. Moreover, the intensified export trade in ivory,
slaves, and especially gold from Africa drew Africans, even)
those far from the centers of trade, into a widening network of
global relations. With the arrival of Europeans in sub-Saharan,
Africa in the late fifteenth century, the pace and intensity of the
cultural and commercial contacts became even greater, and

many African societies faced new and profound challenges.
2

Further Readings

$
Several books are useful in relation to this chapter. The pe-
riod covered is summarized in Robert O. Collins and James
M. Burns, A History of Sub-Saharan Africa (2007). Essential ~
reading on Central Africa is Jan Vansina, Paths in the Rain-
forests (1990) and his How Societies Are Born: Governance in
West Central Africa (2004). A general introduction to the
grassland empires of the Western Sudan is presented in
David Conrad, Empires of Medieval West Africa (2005), while
Michael Gomez, African Dominion: A New History of Empire in
Early and Medieval West Africa (2018) provides an overview
of the empires of the Western Sudan. On the Swahili coast,
see A. Mazrui and I. Shariff, The Swahili: Idiom and Identity
of an African People (1994) which emphasizes ‘language;
and R. L..Pouwells, Horn and Crescent: Cultural Change and
Traditional Islam on the East African Coast, 800-1900, 2nd
ed. (2002). John Middleton, The World of the Swahili (1992)
Mark Horton and John Middleton, The Swahili: The Social
Landscape of a Mercantile Society (2000), and Chapurukha
Kusimba, The Rise and Fall of Swahili City States (1999) are
all good introductions to the topic. On Ethiopia, see Harold
Marcus, A History of Ethiopia (1994). Stuart Munro-Hay, The
Quest for the Ark of the Covenant (2005) delves into the Judaic
and Christian origins of Ethiopia. A very good survey of
the early history of Africa with interesting comments on
the Nok culture is Susan Keech McIntosh and Roderick
J. McIntosh’s “From Stone to Metal: New Perspectives on
the Later Prehistory of West Africa,” Journal of World History
2, no. 1 (1988): 89-133. Graham Connah, Forgotten Africa:

An Introduction to Its Archaeology (2004) reveals recent find
ings in that field. J. R Ade Ajayi and Michael Crowder’s
History of West Africa, 2 vols. (1987) contains excellent re-
view chapters by specialists. N. Levtzion’s Ancient Ghani
and Mali (1973) is still the best short introduction to these
kingdoms of the Sahel, but more recent are David Robinson,
Muslim Societies in African History (2004), and the essays
collected in Nehemia Levtzion and Randall Pouwels, eds,
The History of Islam in Africa (2000).

Two good books on the Kengo kingdom are Anne
Hilton's The.Kingdom of the Kongo (1992), which shows how
African systems of thought accommodated the arrival of
Europeans and their culture, and Koen Bostoan and Inge
Brinkman, eds. The Kongo Kingdom: The Origins, Dynamics
and Cosmopolitan Culture of an African Polity (2018). Josepht
Vogel, Great Zimbabwe: The Iron Age in South Central Africa
(2004). is a good starting point, David Birmingham and
Phyllis Martin’s History of Central Africa, 2 vols. (1983) is a
excellent regional history.

Two multivolume general histories of Africa tha
provide synthetic articles by leading scholars on many
of the topics discussed in this chapter are The Cambridge
History of Africa, 8 vols. (1975-1986); and the UNESCO:
General History of Africa, 7 vols. to date (1981-).

Some important source materials on African history
for this period include three translations of the Mandé
epic Sundiata: David C. Conrad and Djanta Tassey Conde’s
Sunjata: A West African Epic of the Mande Peoples (2004)

--- End of Page 20 ---
T Niane’s Sundiata: An Epic of Old Mali (1986); and Bamba
o and Banna Kanute, Sunjata: Gambian Versions of the
Epic (2000). Other sources include G. R. Crone, ed.,

Voyages of Cadamosto, 2nd series, vol. 80 (1937), which
Js with Mali, Cape Verde, Senegal, and Benin; Maylin
witt, ed., The Portuguese in West Africa 1415-1670 (2010);

What were the products of Africa that attracted inter-
national trade, and what did Africans want in return?

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 185

and Ross Dunn’s indispensable edition of The Adventures
of Ibn Battuta: A Muslim Traveler of the 14th Century (1990).
Arab sources are translated in Nehemia Levtzion and Jay
Spaulding, Medieval West Africa: Views from Arab Scholars
and Merchants (2003).

Critical Thinking Questions

3. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of politi-
cally decentralized societies with those that had mon-
archies or other forms of hereditary rule.

4

--- End of Page 21 ---
