Chapter 9

The World in 1450:
Changing Balance
of World Power

Contents and Learning Objectives

After reading each section, you should be able to answer these questions:

9.1 Key Changes in the Middle East

What were the most important changes occurring in the Middle East

by 1450?
92 The Structure of Transregional Trade

What caused the Chinese decision to abandon major expeditions?
93 The Rise of the West

What are the main issues in explaining new outreach from Western

Europe? What are the principal interpretations?

94 Outside the World Network

How did patterns in the Americas and Polynesia reflect their isolation

+ from main transregional trade networks?

Figure 9.1

Chinese junk, from a late sixteenth-
century Dutch print.

A Chinese Junk, illustration from ‘Jan
Huyghen van Linschoten, His Discourse
of Voyages into the East and West
Indies’, 1579-92 (engraving), Doetechum,
Johannes Baptista van, the Younger
(c.1560-1630)/Private Collection/
Bridgeman Images

213


--- End of Page 1 ---
214 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

THE COMPASS IS A SIMPLE ENOUGH device—something you can make yourself wig, 4
an iron needle and a magnet. Yet it was also a revolutionary device, allowing sailors (and a
now, airplane pilots) to maintain a sense of direction no matter how dark, stormy, foggy, i
or unfamiliar the environment. i
Although there has been debate about the origins of the compass, the instrument was)
clearly developed first by the Chinese. Chinese scientists may have had some knowledge “4
of magnetic principles as early as the first century. Actual compasses may have been de. ’

veloped during the Tang dynasty. They undoubtedly originated from the discovery of; ji
naturally magnetized iron, or lodestone, that could then be used to fashion a needle that

would point north. Some believe that the Chinese first used compasses in the practice of

arr
of

the forces of nature.

feng shui, a set of design principles by which people can align their living quarters with j

Compasses for navigation had been introduced by 1100. They were part of a growing
Chinese effort to make contact with sources of spices and teas in Southeast Asia. Prior to:
that point, Chinese seagoing had been confined to coastlines, but now it became much? =
more venturesome (Figure 9.1). Wide-ranging Chinese expeditions introduced the com 7.
pass to seafarers throughout the Indian Ocean, including Arab merchants, by the twelfth, A :
century. Europeans are first known to have used the compass in 1187. Europeans may.
have invented the compass separately, but it is far more likely that they learned about its
use as a result of contacts with Arabs or Asians.

The compass was fundamental to ambitious seagoing expeditions, like the great

stars, the compass would provide the guidance for Columbus’s travels to the Americas.
Even before this it began to change the shape of world history by facilitating dramatic
new contacts and exchanges. By the thirteenth century, various seagoing peoples—
Malaysians, for example, as well as Europeans—were introducing improvements in

}
{
:
Chinese voyages through the Indian Ocean. Along with observation of the sun and —
j
}
i
4
'
the compass, making it easier to read and more stable at sea. Italian navigators intro

:

duced the compass card, which involved placing the needle over a set of indicators.
Knowledge of the compass reached Scandinavia by 1300, a further step in the long pro-

cess of dissemination.

In 1400 the world was undergoing a profound transition. While there are a number of
elements involved, the decline of the Mongols was a key spur. Because the rise and con-
solidation of the Mongol Empire had produced such profound effects in Asia and Europe,
its gradual retreat inevitably had huge consequences. i

This chapter highlights the main changes taking shape by the early fifteenth century:
The principal focus is the shifting balance among civilizations in Asia, Africa, and Europe
and how these power shifts changed the nature of international contact.

This period of transition began with the decline of Arab strength—symbolized by
the fall of the last Arab caliphate in 1258—and the disruptions that Mongol incursions
caused elsewhere in Asia and Eastern Europe. These developments created new op
portunities in the Afro-Eurasian network that had been established during the previ-
ous centuries, initially under Arab sponsorship. Various candidates emerged to take
a new international leadership role once the Mongol Empire faded, including, for @
short time, Ming China. The Chinese expeditions showed the importance transregional

i
:
:
:
:
i
I
:
'
i

aa ne ea ro ome

--- End of Page 2 ---
With

a ee

}
}

contacts had acquired. The end of the expeditions, however, opened the way for new
alignments. Within the Middle East itself, Arab and then Mongol decline created new
4 portunities for Turkish conquerors and migrants. In 1453 the Ottoman Turks cap-
tured Constantinople, effectively completing the destruction of the Byzantine Empire
and creating a new Islamic political power. The Ottomans quickly established control
around much of the Black Sea, including the Balkans, and began to push southward
jnto Arab lands.

While the Ottomans would play some role in transregional trade, the most dy-
namic new contender for leadership ultimately proved to be Western Europe; the con-
ditions that propelled Western civilization into this new position around 1400 form
the second key theme of this chapter. The West was not yet a major power; it did not
replace the Arabs or Chinese as international leaders quickly or easily. The first stages
of the rise of the West were accompanied by important changes in Western civiliza-
tion itself, which were beginning to take shape by 1400. At this point, Italy, Spain, and
Portugal took the lead in Western European outreach, a lead that they would hold for
about two centuries.

It is also vital to note changes in societies outside the international network, in
the Americas and Polynesia. New difficulties in the great American empires, in partic-
ular, would reduce their ability to respond to the challenge of contact with Europeans
after 1492.

Focusing on new frameworks for international contacts, this chapter inevitably deals
with the question of why individual societies reacted differently to key forces. Compar-
ison is essential. Western Europe’s response, for example, should be compared to reac-
tions at the same time in regions like Japan or sub-Saharan Africa.

Amid variations and great change, the transitions around 1450 highlighted one im-
portant continuity as well: the importance of the level of contacts that had developed
through the formation of the transcontinental network. A variety of societies in Africa,
Asia, and Europe depended on far-flung trade relations, and when one exchange net-
work collapsed-—as with the decline in travel security overland when the Mongol em-
pires faded—another system quickly moved into place. Not only trade, but continued
exchanges of technology and ideas, continued to mark Afro-Eurasian relationships
during the fifteenth century.

Black Death spreads in
Europe and Russia

See ia Resend
1258 1304-1374 1368 1400
_ Mongol conquest of Life of Petrarch; development | Mongols expelled from End of Polynesian migrations
Baghdad; fall of Abbasid of Italian Renaissance China; Ming dynasty 1408-1433
penne 1320s a Chinese trading expeditions
©. 1266~1337 Spread of bubonic plague 1439
- - Life of Giotto (Black Death) in Gobi desert Portugal takes over Azores:
1275-1292 1320s increasing expeditions into
Marco Polo in China First European use of cannon Atlantic and along Northwest
1290-1317 in warfare African coast
-Famines in Europe | 1830s *
1291 Black Death reaches China
Fitst tain expedition seeks | 1347
Toute to Indies Black Death reaches Sicily
1348
Peak of Black Deaih in
Middle East
1348-1375

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 215

1453

Ottomans capture
Constantinople, fall of
Byzantine Empire

1469
Union of Aragon and Castile;
rise of Spanish monarchy


--- End of Page 3 ---
216 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

9.1 Key Changes in the Middle East |
|

What were the most important changes occurring in the Middle East by 1450?

The new world order that was beginning to emerge by 1400 first involved major reshuf
fling in the Middle East and North Africa. Developments occurred in various aspects of }
society, and some of them are not easy to explain. y
Culture shifted, along with politics, in this crucial region. An earlier tension in phi-
losophy and the arts yielded to the predominance of the Islamic faith. The new Piety —
associated with the rising Sufi movement, discussed in Chapter 5, contributed to a ney
religious emphasis. In literature, attention to secular themes, such as the joys of feasting”
and hunting, gave way to more strictly religious ideas. The same shift occurred in phi
losophy, with new attacks on the idea of combining faith with reason. Thus Al-Ghazali
in a book revealingly titled The Destruction of the Philosophers, claimed. to use Aristotle's’
logic to show that it was imposible to discover religious truth by human reason. Many =
Sufi scholars wrote excitedly of their mystical contacts with God and the stages of their
religious passion. Islamic science continued, but its role diminished. q
Changes in society and the economy were as telling as the shifts in politics and in:
tellectual life. As the authority of the caliphate declined, landlords seized power over th
peasantry. As a result, from about 1100 onward, Middle Eastern peasants increasingly lost _
their freedom, becoming serfs on large estates, providing the labor and produce landlords —
sought. This loss was not the peasants’ alone, for agricultural productivity suffered as a re-
sult. Landlords turned to sucking what they could from their estates rather than trying to
develop a more vital agriculture. Tax revenues declined, and Arab and other Middle Eastern
traders began to lose ground. Few Arab coins have been found in Europe dating from later i
than 1100. European merchants began to control their own turf and challenge the Arabs in
:
|
|

other parts of the Mediterranean, gaining increasing initiative in this vital trading area.

Arab decline was gradual and incomplete. The reduced dynamism in trade did not
take the Arabs out of major world markets, for example. Indeed, Middle Eastern com-
merce rebounded somewhat by 1400.

Finally, the political fragmentation of the Arab world did not produce prolonged
confusion in the Middle East or in the religion of Islam. The emerging Ottoman Turk
ish state soon mastered many of the lands of the old caliphate as well as the Byzantine
corner, expanding into Southeastern Europe. The new empire gave renewed vitality to
Islamic politics, and it would soon be joined by two other Islamic empires, in Persia and
India. (See Chapter 15 for the development of the Ottoman Empire.) It is important to
realize that the empire was far more powerful, politically and militarily, than the caliph-
ate had been for many centuries. It was thus more challenging to rivals in neighboring
civilizations such as Western Europe or Russia.

9.2 The Structure of Transregional Trade

What caused the Chinese decision to abandon major expeditions?

Even the rise of the Ottoman Empire would not restore the full international vigor that
the Islamic caliphate had wielded had at the height of its powers. The empire did not be
come the sole hub of an international network, as the caliphate had been a few centuries
before. By the fifteenth century, merchants from many societies were competing for roles
in transregional trade. In the Mediterranean, Europe, and particularly Italy, merchants
were increasingly active. In the Indian Ocean, merchants from India and Southeast Asia,
most of them Muslims, rivaled Arab activity.

The big issue in the fifteenth century, however, involved the aftermath of the Mongol
era. For 150 years, the interlocking Mongol states had facilitated overland trade betwee

coe

Oc
trit

--- End of Page 4 ---
vw

5

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 217

China, the Middle East, and Europe. Essentially, this Mongol system had replaced earlier
Arab leadership in facilitating transregional trade. But the Mongol defeat in China, late
in the fourteenth century, and new pressure on Mongol rulers in Russia and elsewhere
unraveled this system. Overland travel became more difficult and dangerous without
Mongol political protection. Trade and its motivations did not diminish in importance,
put inevitably new emphasis focused on seagoing routes, particularly in the Indian
Ocean. Two societies, first China and then Europe, sought to take advantage of the op-

portunities involved.

9.2.1 Chinese Outreach and Reconsideration

For a brief time China asserted new leadership in international trade. This activity
reflected earlier gains in Chinese shipping, and China’s long-standing focus on manufac-
turing for export. Rebellions in China drove out the deeply resented Mongol overlords
in 1368. A rebel leader from a peasant family, Zhu Yuanzhang (joo wan-jang), seized the
Mongol capital of Beijing and proclaimed a new Ming—meaning “brilliant’”—dynasty
that was to last until 1644. The dynasty began with a burst of unusual expansionism.
The initial Ming rulers pressed to secure the borders of the Middle Kingdom. This meant
pushing the Mongols far to the north, to the plains of what is now Mongolia. It meant rees-
tablishing influence over neighboring governments and winning tribute payments from
states in Korea, Vietnam, and Tibet, reviving much of the East Asian regional structure set
up by the Tang dynasty. Far more unusual was a new policy, adopted soon after 1400, of
mounting huge, state-sponsored trading expeditions to Southern Asia and beyond.

A first fleet sailed in 1405 to India, with 62 ships carrying 28,000 men. Later voyages
reached the Middle East and the eastern coast of Africa, bringing chinaware and copper
coinage in exchange for local goods. Chinese shipping at its height consisted of 2,700
coastal vessels, 400 armed naval ships, and at least as many long-distance ships. Nine
great treasure ships, the most sophisticated in the world at the time, explored the Indian
Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea, establishing trade connections but also seeking
tribute payments all along the way.

Between 1405 and their termination in 1433, these expeditions were commanded by the
admiral Zheng He. A Muslim from Western China, Zheng He was well suited to deal with
Muslims in Southeast Asia on the Indian Ocean trade route. Zheng He was also a eunuch,
castrated for service at the royal court. China’s Ming emperors retained a large harem of
wives to ensure succession, and eunuchs were needed to guard them without threat of sex-
ual rivalry; many gained bureaucratic powers well beyond this service. Zheng He’s expe-
ditions usually hugged the coastline, but he had an improved compass and excellent maps
as well as huge vessels that contained ample supplies—even gardens—as well as goods
for trade. His fleets must have impressed, even terrified, the local rulers around the Indian
Ocean, many of whom paid tribute to the emperor. For even though Zheng He brought
gifts, he also had well-armed troops on his expéditions. Several missions visited China from
the Middle Hast and Africa. From Africa also came ostriches, zebras, and giraffes for the im-
Petial 200; the latter became the unicoms of Chinese fable. But Zheng He was resented by
the Confucian bureaucrats, who refused even to write much about him in their chronicles.

There is no question that the course of world history might have been changed dra-
matically had the Chinese thrust continued, for the tiny European expeditions that began to
“ep down the western coast of Africa at about the same time would have been no match
for this combination of merchant and military organization. Indeed, historians wonder if one
®xpedition might have rounded Africa to at least glimpse the Atlantic. But China’s emperors
called the expeditions to a halt in 1433. The bureaucrats had long opposed the new trade
Policy, out of rivalry with other officials such as Zheng He, but there were deeper reasons
m well. The costs seemed unacceptable, given the continuing expenses of the campaigns
“gainst the Mongols and a further commitment to build a more massive protective wall in

Zheng He

[jehng huh] Chinese Muslim
admiral who commanded

a series of Indian Ocean,
Persian Gulf, and Red Sea trade
expeditions under third Ming
emperor, Yunglo, between 1405
and 1433,


--- End of Page 5 ---
218 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

the north, while also establishing a luxurious new capital city in Beijing. A young emperp,
also wanted to differentiate his policies from those of his predecessor. So the expeditions —

ground to an abrupt halt. This was a crucial shift. It reflected a preference for traditional ex.

penditures rather than distant foreign involvements. Chinese merchant activity continued tom
be extensive in Southeast Asia. Chinese trading groups established permanent settlements in
the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia, where they added to the cultural diversity of the #
area and maintained a disproportionate role in local and regional trading activities into the
twentieth century. And manufacturing levels remained high. Nonetheless, China’s chance tp —
become a dominant world trading power was lost, at least for several centuries. =|
One result, today, is an interesting challenge to interpretation. To Western eyes,
accustomed to judging a society’s dynamism by its ability to reach out and gain news
territories or trade positions, China’s decision may seem hard to understand—the pre
cursor to decline. But to the Chinese, it was the ambitious expeditionary flurry that wag
unusual, not its end. China’s leaders were suspicious of any policy that would unduly.
elevate commercial activity as opposed to rule by the scholar-gentry. Ming emperors —
consolidated their rule over the empire’s vast territory. Internal economic development
continued as well, with no need for foreign products save for goods from Southeast Asia.
Moreover, Chinese products continued to be highly valued in the world market. Indus. _
try expanded, with growth in the production of textiles and porcelain; ongoing trade
with Southeast Asia enriched the port cities; agricultural production and population i
creased. The end of the expeditions had no immediate downsides for China itself.
The shift in Chinese policy unintentionally cleared the way for another, in most ways ;
less organized, civilization to work toward a new international position. With the Arabs in
partial eclipse and with China retreating from its brief initiative, hesitant Western expan-
sionism, ventured before 1400, began to take on new significance. Within a century, Western
explorers and traders had launched an attempt to seize international trading dominance and
had expanded the international network to include parts of the Americas for the first time.

9.3 The Rise of the West

What are the main issues in explaining new outreach from Western Europe? What are
the principal interpretations?

|
)
The West’s gradual emergence into larger world contacts during the fifteenth century t
was surprising in many respects. Western expansion had numerous causes, and it must i
be seen as a result of growing problems as well as new strengths. }

Westerners remained awed by the powerful bureaucracies and opulent treasuries of
empires in the traditional civilization centers such as Constantinople. Furthermore, the
West was changing in some painful ways. Key features of medieval culture and society
were being questioned by 1400. The church, which had long been one of the organiz-
ing institutions of Western civilization, was under new attack. Medieval philosophy had )
passed its creative phase. Warrior aristocrats, long a key leadership group in feudal so- t
ciety, softened their style of life, preferring court rituals and jousting tournaments and
adopting military armor so cumbersome that real fighting was difficult.

Even more strikingly, the lives and economic activities of ordinary Europeans were in
disarray. This was a time of crisis, and Europe’s expanding world role could not reverse the
fundamental challenges to its internal economic and demographic structure. Europeats
began to suffer from recurrent famine after 1300 because population outstripped the food ;
supply and no new food production techniques were discovered. Famine reduced disease |
resistance, making Europe more vulnerable to the bubonic plagues that spread from Asia
Bubonic plague, or Black Death, surfaced in various parts of Asia in the fourteenth cet” '
tury. In China it reduced the population by nearly 30 percent by 1400. Following trade ;
routes, it then spread into India and the Middle East, causing thousands of deaths per day j

by?

--- End of Page 6 ---
Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 219

in the larger cities. The plague’s worst European impact occurred between 1348 and 1375,

a py which time 30 million people, one-third of Europe's population, died. As we have seen,

lex the resulting economic dislocation produced bitter strikes and peasant uprisings.

edto : . Lye

asin 93.1 Sources of Dynamism: Medieval Vitality

tthe How, in this context, could the West be poised for a new global role? The answer to that

0 the uestion is complex. A number of different interpretations deserve attention, although

eto some might be blended. First, several key advances that had taken shape in European
society were not really reversed by the troubles of the decades around 1400. For exam-

2yes, ple, the strengthening of feudal monarchy provided more effective national or regional

ae wernments for much of the West. The Hundred Years’ War between Britain and France

Py stimulated innovations in military organization, including nonaristocratic soldiers re-

wes cruited and paid directly by the royal government, that enhanced central political power.

duly — Strong regional monarchies took hold in parts of Spain and in Portugal as Christian lead-

To ers drove back the Muslim rulers of this region. The growth of cities and urban economies

met continued to spur the commercial side of Western society. Even the church had made its

Asia. peace with such key principles of capitalism as profit-seeking. Technology continued to

dus, advance, particularly in ironwork—used for bells and weapons—and timekeeping.

Tade In short, explaining the new Western vigor involves an understanding that some of

nn the gains the West achieved during the previous centuries continued even as certain tra-

J ditional forms wavered.

ways

u . .

oa 9.3.2 Imitation and Commercial Problems

stem ‘Two additional factors affected Western Europe’s international position, one a clear plus, the

eand © other a growing problem. New opportunities for imitation were an obvious advantage. The

ne Mongol state established in Asia and Eastern Europe in the late thirteenth and early four-

Q teenth centuries provided new access to Asian knowledge and technology. Political stability

33 and an openness to foreign visitors by the great khans helped Westerners learn of Asian

technologies, ranging from printing to the compass and explosive powder. Western Europe

had ideal access in the Mongol period. It was not disrupted by the Mongols, as Eastern Eu-

tare rope and so many parts of Asia were, but it was in active contact, unlike sub-Saharan Africa.

Internal European warfare and merchant zeal made Western Europe an eager learner, for
the Asian technologies promised to respond to both military and commercial needs.

vtury |
must 7 The second international factor was the intensification of European deficiencies in the

; existing world market and international arena. From the Crusades onward, Western elites
ies of ©
>the «os
ciety Visualizing the Past
niz- .o .
‘had Population Trends
iso: F Revi Q tion:
vand | Percentages of Total World Population eview Guestion:

e . 1. These population charts show relationships in
wre int population size, and comparative trends in population
ethe | q 000: =: uU size, among the major inhabited regions of the world.
eans Europe 12,2 19.6 16.3 Population pressure did not drive European expansion in
food Asia 62.9 67.6 59.8 59.2 the fifteenth century, because the population was falling
Pe q Africa 41.2 10.0 68 99 temporarily, but there were longer-term trends, from the
re, 3 Americas 134 24 27 8.9 14.0 year 1000, that might have encouraged the expansionist
cen q Oceania an 04 on ne 0.6 effort. The chart allows comparison, showing what

regions experienced the greatest changes in population

4
rade A SOURCE: Based on Wrong, Dennis H. Population and Society, 4th Edition. levels between 1000 and 1800. What might have caused
day 7 New York: Random House, Inc., 1977.


--- End of Page 7 ---
220. Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

these changes? Finally, the chart extends comparisons
into the later twentieth century.

2. Reading population statistics provides vital information, but
it also raises questions, including ones about causation,

which numbers alone cannot answer. What other data Would 4
be most helpful to put these figures in appropriate world SI
history contexts? Which figures are more revealing: absolute. 2
numbers or percentages? Why? r

Population Levels (Millions)

se

Europe 36
Asia (includes Middle East) 485
Africa 33
Americas 39
Oceania (includes Australia) 16
Totals 294.5

2.25
611.25

180 890 635

625 970 2300
70 110 385
24 145 545
25 675 23
901.5 1621.75 3888

NOTE: Earlier figures are only estimates; they are fairly accurate indicators of relative size.
SOURCE: Based_on Wrong, Dennis H. Population and Society, 4th Edition, New York: Random House, Inc,, 1977.

had become used to increasing consumption of Asian luxury products, including spices :
such as cinnamon and nutmeg, silks, sugar, perfumes, and jewels. In exchange for the hn _
ury items, Europeans mainly had cruder goods to offer: wool, tin, copper, honey, and salt,
The value of European exports almost never equaled the value of what was imported from
Asia. The resulting unfavorable balance of trade had to be made up in gold, but Western —
Europe had only a limited gold supply. By 1400, the constant drain to Asia was creating —
a gold famine that threatened the whole European economy with collapse. Furthermore,
there were legitimate concerns about a new Muslim threat. The Ottoman Empire was tak-
ing shape, and Europeans began to fear a new Muslim surge. Even before this, the Muslim
capture of the last crusader stronghold (the city of Acre in the Middle East) in 1291 gave
Muslim traders, particularly Egyptians, new opportunities to act as intermediaries in the
Asian trade, for there were no Western-controlled ports left in the Eastern Mediterranean.
One response to this was a series of conquests by the city-state of Venice along the eastem
coast of the Adriatic Sea. A more important response was to begin exploring alternative

routes to Asia that would bypass the Middle East and the feared and hated Muslim realms.

In sum: One explanation for Europe's new activity would emphasize the gains made in the
later postclassical centuries, particularly in terms of urban and commercial growth, despite
population setbacks. These gains could now be combined with new technologies learned from
Asia—especially weaponry. The final ingredient was the realization that innovations were es: _
sential to meet balance-of-payment problems and concerns about reliance on Muslim traders.

This explanation may not be entirely adequate, and it certainly is not the explanation
preferred by most European historians. They turn—sometimes exclusively—to another
set of factors: cultural developments within Europe that would then spill outward.

Document
Bubonic Plague

The spread of the plague in the fourteenth century, affecting
major parts of Asia, the Middle East and Egypt, and Europe,
was one of the great devastations in world history. Muslim
and Christian observers described the plague and reactions
to it. Ibn al-Wardi was a Muslim scholar who died of the
plague in 1349; Jean de Venette was a monk who died
in 1368.

lon Al-Wardi

vant? Oh God, pray for our master, Muhammad, and givé
him peace. Save us for his sake from the attacks of the
plague and give us shelter.

i
i
i
God is my security in every adversity. My sufficiency is
in God alone. Is not God sufficient protection for His se”
I
a |
a

--- End of Page 8 ---
F)

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 221

The plague frightened and killed. It began in the land
of darkness. Oh, what a visitor! It has been current for
fifteen years. China was not preserved from it nor could
the strongest fortress hinder it. The plague afflicted the
Indians of India. It weighted upon the Sind. It seized with
its hand and ensnared even the lands of the Uzbeks. The
plague destroyed mankind in Cairo. Its eye was cast upon
Egypt, and behold, the people were wide-awake. It stilled
all movement in Alexandria. The plague did its work like
a silkworm....

Then, the plague turned to Upper Egypt. It, also, sent
forth its storm to Barqah. The plague attacked Gaza, and
it shook ‘Asqalan severely. The plague oppressed Acre.
The scourge came to Jerusalem and paid the zakat [with
the souls of men]. It overtook those people who fled to the
al-‘Aqsa Mosque, which stands beside the Dome of the
Rock. If the door of mercy had not been opened, the end
of the world would have occurred in a moment. It then
hastened its pace and attacked the entire maritime plain.
The plague trapped Sidon and descended unexpectedly
upon Beirut, cunningly.

This plague is for the Muslims a martyrdom and a re-
ward, and for the disbelievers a punishment and a rebuke.
When the Muslim endures misfortune, then patience is
his worship. It has been established by our Prophet: God
bless him and give him peace, that the plague-stricken
are martyrs. This noble tradition is true and assures mar-
tyrdom. And this secret should be pleasing to the true
believer. If someone says it causes infection and destruc-
tion, say: God creates and recreates. If the liar disputes the
maiter of infection and tries to find an explanation, | say
that the Prophet, on him be peace, said: who infected
the first? If we acknowledge the ptague’s devastation of
the people, it is the will of the Chosen Doer. So it hap-
pened again and again....

Among the benefits... is the removal of one’s hopes
and the improvement of his earthly works. It awakens
men from their indifference for the provisioning of their
final journey. °

Nothing prevented us from running away from the
Plague except our devotion to the noble tradition. Come
then, seek the aid of God Almighty for raising the plague,
for He is the best helper. Oh God, we call You better
than anyone did before. We call You to raise from us the
Pestilence and plague. We do not take refuge in its remov-
al other than with You. We do not depend on our good
heaith against the Plague but on you. We seek your pro-
tection, oh Lord of creation, from the blows of this stick.

SOURCE: Michael Dols. “Ibn Al-Wardi's Risalah Al-Naba ‘An Al-Waba’, A
Translation of @ Major Source for the History of the Black Death in the
Middle East.” in Near Eastern Numisamates, tconography, Epigraphy,
and History: Studies in Honor of George ©. Miles. Edited by Dikran

kK. Kouymjian (Beruit: American University of Beirut, 1974), 443-445.
Printed by permission of The American University of Beirut Press.

Rey

Jean de Venette

This sickness or pestilence was called an epidemic by
the doctors. Nothing like the great numbers who died
in the years.1348 and 1349 has been heard of or seen
or read of in times past. This plague and disease came
from ymaginatione or association and contagion, for if a
well man visited the sick he only rarely avoided the risk
of death. Wherefore in many towns timid priests with-
drew, leaving the exercise of their ministry to such of the
religious as were more daring.... A very great number
of the saintly sisters of the Hétel-Dieu who, not fearing
to die, nursed the sick in all sweetness and humility,
with no thought of honor, a number too often renewed
by death, rest in peace with Christ, as we may piously
believe.

Some sai¢ that this pestilence was caused by infec-
tion of the air and waters, since there was at this time no
famine nor lack of food supplies, but on the contrary great
abundance. As a result of this theory of infected water
and air as the source of the Plague the Jews were sud-
denly and violently charged with infecting wells and water
and corrupting the air. The whole world rose up against
them cruelly on this account. In Germany and other parts
of the worid where Jews lived, they were massacred and
slaughtered by Christians, and many thousands were
burned everywhere, indiscriminately...

But woe is me! the world was not changed for the
better but for the worse. ... For men were more avaricious
and grasping than before, even though they had far greater
Possessions. They were more covetous and disturbed
each other more frequently with suits, brawls, disputes
and pleas. Nor by the mortality resulting from this terrible
plague inflicted by God was peace between kings and
lords established. And this fact was very remarkable. Al-
though there was an abundance of all goods, yet every-
thing was twice as dear, whether it were utensils, victuals,
or merchandise, hired helpers or peasants and serfs, ex-
cept for some hereditary domains which remained abun-
dantly stocked with everything. Charity began to cool,
and iniquity with ignorance and sin to abound, for few
could be found in the good towns and castles who knew
how or were willing to instruct children in the rudiments
of grammar....

SOURCE: “From The Chronicle of Jean de Venetie”, translated by Jean
Birdsall, edited by Richard A. Newhall. Copyright © 1953 Columbia
University Press, Reprinted with permission of the publisher.

Review Questions:

1. How did Christian and Muslim reactions compare?

2. Did the reactions suggest that the plague might have
different results in the Middle East and in Europe?

3. How did the plague relate to other major developments
toward the end of the postclassical period?


--- End of Page 9 ---
222 Part ll: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Renaissance

[REHN-uh-sahns] Cultural and
political movement in Western
Europe; began in Italy c. 1400;
rested on urban vitality and
expanding commerce; featured
literature and art with distinctly
more secular priorities than
those of the Middle Ages.

Francesco Petrarch

[PEE-trahrk] (1304-1374) One of

the major literary figures of the

Western Renaissance; an Italian
author and humanist.

9.3.3 Secular Directions in the Italian Renaissance

A further set of significant changes in Europe started in Italy, partly because git.
ies were livelier and more independent in this region than in the north. In 1499

Italy was in the midst of the vital cultural and political movement known as the _
Renaissance, or rebirth—referring to revival of styles and themes from classicaj
Greece and Rome. The early phases of the Renaissance stressed more secular sub.

jects in literature and art. Religious art remained dominant but used more realistic

portrayals of people and nature, and some nonreligious themes surfaced outright —
(Figure 9.2). The doings of human beings deserved attention for their own sake, in —
the Renaissance view, not merely as they reflected a divine plan. Artists and writers _
became more openly ambitious for personal reputation and glory. Italy also served
as the center of initial Renaissance culture because it had more contact with Roman sj
tradition than did the rest of Europe and because by the fourteenth century it led the _

West in banking and trade.

9.3.4 Renaissance Culture

Although it had political and commercial roots in Italian cities, the Renaissance was

first and foremost a cultural movement, launched in Florence and manifesting itself _

in literature and various arts (Figure 9.3). The Renaissance focused on a new interest

in stylistic grace and a concern for practical ethics and codes of behavior for urban
gentlemen. One leading fourteenth-century writer, Francesco Petrarch, not only took —
pride in his city and his age but explored the glories of personal achievement with new

confidence.

Figure 9.2

Europe’s new spirit amid old values. Dante, an Italian writer of the fourteenth ceniury, holds a copy of
his great work, the Divine Comedy, with both religious (souls tormented in hell) and Renaissance (the

solid, classical-styfe urban buildings of the city of Florence) symbolism greeting him. The painting was
designed by Domenico di Michelina for the cathedral of Florence in 1465.

Album/Alamy Stock Photo

G
i
2
i
BS)
z
$

__ =e

--- End of Page 10 ---
Chapier 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 223

Figure 9.3

‘cit.

400,

the

sical

sub-

listic

tight

2, in

‘iters

tved

‘man

J the

was

itself

‘erest

ban

took — Although the nave of Florence Cathedral was completed in the fourteenth century, it was not until

inew E the fifteenth century that architect Filippo Brunelleschi was able to solve the engineering challenge
presented by the plan for the massive dome. In order to eliminate the need for temporary wooden
scaffolding during construction, Brunelleschi used a skeleton of eight large ribs alternated with eight
pairs of thinner ribs, all tied together by nine sets of horizontal ties, all of which would be able to support

— the workers as the dome was raised.

: MasterLu/Fotolia

Innovation flourished in the visual arts and music as well. The subject matter of art
moved toward nature and people, including cityscapes and portraits of the rich and pow-
erful, whether the themes were religious or secular. Florentine painter Giotto (gee-YAW-
toh) led the way, departing from medieval formalism and stiffness. While still a young
apprentice to the painter Cimabue (chee-mah-BOO-eh), Giotto painted a fly on the nose
of one of Cimabue’s portrait subjects, and it was so realistic that Cimabue repeatedly
tried to swat it off before going back to work on the canvas. Other painters, beginning
later in the fourteenth century, started to introduce perspective while using new colors
and other materials. In architecture, favor shifted away from the Gothic to a classicism
derived from the styles of Greece and Rome. Vivid, realistic statues complemented the
ew palaces and public buildings. 4

The impact of the early Renaissance must not be exaggerated. It had little influence
Outside of Italy. Even in Italy, it focused on high culture, not popular culture, and on the
arts; there was little initial interest in science. And although it built on distinctive political
and economic forms, it was not a full break from medieval tendencies.

Nevertheless, these new cultural currents were an important innovation in West-
em history. The full ramifications of the Renaissance feed into the next period of both
world and Western history (see Chapter 11). The movement was only getting started
by 1400. However, the wide range of Italian commerce and shipping proved to be one

di Of the building blocks of European outreach. By the fifteenth century, ships, particu-
of : a from the western Italian city of Genoa, which was less well placed than Venice
oa t Eastern Mediterranean trade and the resultant links to Asia, were ready for new
a Toles, Ambitious city-state governments encouraged new ventures, eager to collect
a More fax money and promote commerce as one of their explicit functions. A general

“Renaissance spirit” could also spur innovation. Whereas people such as Petrarch


--- End of Page 11 ---
224 Part I: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Castile and Aragon
Regional kingdoms of the
Tberian peninsula; pressed
reconquest of the peninsula
from Muslims and ultimately
united under the Spanish
monarchy.

Vivaldis

Two Genoese brothers

who attempted to find a
western route to the “Indies”;
disappeared in 1291; precursors.

of thrust into southern Atlantic.

Vasco da Gama

Portuguese captain who sailed
for India in 1497; established
early Portuguese dominance in
Indian Ocean.

defined human ambition mainly in cultural terms, other urban and commercial lead.
ers, including seafarers such as Christopher Columbus of Genoa, might apply some of
the same confidence and desire for personal glory to different areas, such as explora.
tion or conquest. -

9.3.5 The Iberian Spirit of Religious Mission

i
f
:
{
:
i
Along with Italy, a key center for change by the fourteenth century was the Iberian Pen.
insula, where Christian military leaders had for several centuries been pressing back the )
boundaries of the Muslim state in Spain. Soon after 1400, major regional monarchies had, i
been established in the provinces of Castile and Aragon, which would be united throug
royal marriage in 1469. .

Even before the marriage between Ferdinand and Isabella, Spanish and Por-
tuguese rulers had developed a vigorous military and religious agenda. They sup- —
ported effective armies, including infantry and noble cavalry. And they believed
that government had a mission to promote Christianity by converting or expelling — 4
Arabs and Jews and by maintaining doctrinal purity within the church. Close links ;
between church and state, portrayed in art, provided revenues and officials for the —
royal government. In return, the government supported church courts in their efforts
to enforce moral and doctrinal purity. Later in the fifteenth century, this interaction —
led to the reestablishment of the church-run courts of the Inquisition in Spain, de-
signed to enforce religious orthodoxy. In other words, Spain and Portugal were de-
veloping effective new governments with a special sense of religious mission and
religious support. These changes most directly promoted the West's expansion into
wider world contacts.

9.3.6 The First Phases of Western Expansion

As early as 1291, two Italian brothers, the Vivaldis from Genoa, sailed with two galleys
through the Straits of Gibraltar, seeking a western route to the “Indies,” the
spice-producing areas of South and Southeast Asia. They were never heard from again.
Although they were precursors of a major western thrust into the southern Atlantic, it is
not even entirely clear what they meant by the “Indies.” Early in the fourteenth century,
other explorers from Genoa rediscovered the Canary Islands, in the Atlantic, populated
by a hunting and gathering people. These islands had been known vaguely since clas-
sical times but had never been explored by Europeans. Genoese sailors also visited the
Madeiras and probably reached the more distant Azores by 1351. Soon after this, ships
from Northeastern Spain, based in the port of Barcelona, sailed along the African coast a8
far south as present-day Sierra Leone.

Until 1430, technological barriers prevented further exploration for alternative
routes. Without adequate navigation instruments, Europeans could not risk wider
ventures into the Atlantic. They also needed better ships than the shallow-drafted,
oar-propelled Mediterranean galleys. However, efforts were underway to develop au
oceangoing sailing vessel. At the same time, the crucial navigational problems wet
met by the compass and the astrolabe, used to determine latitude at sea by reckoning
from the stars. Contacts with Arab merchants and with the Chinese provided
knowledge of these devices. European mapmaking, which improved steadily during
the fourteenth century, was another key innovation. Because of these advances, a
well as mistaken geographic assumptions shown on the map in Figure 9.4, Europe
ans were ready in the decades after 1400 to undertake voyages that were impossible
just a century before. In 1498, the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama became the
first European to reach India by sea, preparing for Portuguese entry into the Indian
Ocean (Figure 9.5).

|
'

|
'
:
'

Fi

--- End of Page 12 ---
Pen-

k the —

shad
ugh

Por-
sup-

aved 5
lling
links ~

r the
‘forts
ction
i, de-
e de-
tand

vinto |

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 225

Columbus is supposed to have had a capy ‘6f this world map in Spain. The map, dating from about
1489, shows the Old World as Europeans were increasingly coming to know it. Note how reachable
India looked to Europeans using this map—although, of course, they had to go around Africa.

PBL Collection/Alamy Stock Photo

93.7 Colonial Patterns

Even as these wider-ranging voyages began, westerners, led by the Spanish and Por-
fuguese, had begun to take advantage of the new lands they had already discovered. A
driving force behind both the further expeditions and the efforts to make already dis-
covered areas economically profitable was Prince Henry of Portugal, known as Henry
the Navigator. A student of astronomy and nautical science, Henry sponsored about
a third of Portuguese voyages of exploration before his death in 1460. His mixture of
motivations—scientific and intellectual curiosity, desire to spread the name of Christ
to unfamiliar lands, and financial interest—reflected some of the key forces in late
Postclassical Europe. .

Portugal by 1439 had taken control of the Azores and had granted land to colonists.
Soon Spaniards and Portuguese had conquered and colonized the Madeiras and Canar-
ies, bringing in Western plants, animals, weapons, and diseases. The result was some-
thing of a laboratory for the larger European colonialism that would soon take shape,

Particularly in the Americas. European colonists quickly set up large agricultural estates

designed to produce cash crops that could be sold on the European market. First they
introduced Sugar, an item once imported from Asia but now available in growing quanti-
Hes from Western-controlled sources. Ultimately, other crops such as cotton and tobacco
Were also introduced to the Atlantic islands. To produce these market crops, the new
colonists brought in slaves from Northwestern Africa, mainly in Portuguese ships—the
frst examples of a new, commercial version of slavery and the first sign that Western ex-
Parsion could have serious impact on other societies as well., oe :

These developments around 1400 remained modest, even in their consequences for

ica, They illustrate mainly how quickly Western conquerors decided what to, do with. 8

Henry the Navigator
Portuguese prince responsible
for the direction of a series of
expeditions along the African
coast in the fifteenth century;
marked the beginning of
Western European expansion.


--- End of Page 13 ---
226 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 9.5

lands and peoples newly in their grasp. The ventures y were i
successful enough to motivate more extensive probes j into.

the southern Atlantic as soon as technology permitted, Ine

were being fully settled.

Finally, these early ventures summed up the swirl of Z
forces that were beginning to reshape the West's role in the
world: inferiorities and fears, particularly with regard to _
the Muslims; economic pressure from an inferior but eager —
position in world trade; and new energies of Renaissance’

best combination of explanations for why Europe began to.
reach out in new ways?

9.4 Outside the World
Network

How did patterns in the Americas and Polynesia reflect
their isolation from main transregional trade networks?

Developments in the Americas and Polynesia were not af-
fected by the new international exchange. During the next
period of world history, these regions all were pulled into
a new level of international contact, but a world balance
sheet in 1400 must emphasize their separateness.

At the same time, several of the societies outside

This eighteenth-century engraving portrays Vasco da Gama’s :
audience with the Indian ruler of Calicut in 1498, This image was made them vulnerable to outside interference thereafter. Such

weil after the fact. What kind of comparison does it suggest between problems included new political strains in the leading

European and Indian societies?

the international network were experiencing some new
problems during the fifteenth century that would leave

American civilizations and a fragmentation of the principal

Universal Art Archive/Alamy Stock Photo

island groups in Polynesian culture.

9.4.1 Political Issues in the Americas

As we discussed in Chapter 8, the Aztec and Inca empires ran into increasing difficulties
not long after 1400. Aztec exploitation of subject peoples for gold, slaves, and religious
sacrifices roused great resentment. What would have happened to the Aztec Empire if
the Spaniards had not intervened after 1500 is not clear, but it is obvious that disunity
created opportunities for outside intervention that might not have existed otherwise. The
Inca system, although far less brutal than that of the Aztecs, provided ongoing tension
between central leadership and local initiative. This complicated effective control of the
vast expanse of the Inca domains. Here too, overextension made change likely by the
1500s—indeed, the empire was already receding somewhat—even without European in-
tervention. At the same time, other cultures were developing in parts of the Americas
that might well have been candidates for new political leadership, if American history
had proceeded in isolation or if European intervention had been less sweeping.

9.4.2 Expansion, Migration, and Conquest in Polynesia

A second region that was later pulled into the expanding world network involved Poly-
nesia. Here, as in the Americas, important changes took place during the postclassical

4
5
deed, voyages of exploration down the coast of Africa and 4
across the Atlantic began to occur as the island colonies _

4

merchants and Iberian rulers. In final analysis, what is the a

era but with no relationship to developments in societies elsewhere in the world. The

--- End of Page 14 ---
Chapter 9; The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 227

key Polynesian themes from the seventh century
to 1400 were expansion, spurts of migration, and
conquests that implanted Polynesian culture
well beyond the initial base in islands such as
qahiti, Samoa, and Fiji (Map 9.1).

One channel of migration pointed north-
ward to the islands of Hawaii. The first Poly-

Map 9.1 POLYNESIAN EXPANSION

tof nesians reached these previously uninhabited
ithe islands before the seventh century, traveling in
‘dto at war canoes. The canoes carried all that was
‘ager needed to settle on new lands, including pigs.
ance These were to wreak some havoc on native flora
8 the and fauna in Hawaii, but at the same time Ha-
an to waiians created a land use system incorporating

coastal fisheries, mid-mountain vegetable crops,
i and highland hunting that supported a sustain-
able lifestyle for centuries.

From the seventh century until about 1300
or 1400, recurrent contacts remained between
the Hawaiian Islands and the larger Society Is-

ect lands group, allowing periodic new migration.
ks? But from about 1400 until the arrival of Euro-
pean explorers in 1778, Hawaiian society was

ated cut off even from Polynesia.

ne Polynesians in Hawaii spread widely

na ecross the islands in agricultur al clusters and Starting in the seventh century, the Polynesians expanded north and south of their
fishing villages amid the volcanic mountains. _ starting point in the Society Islands.

; Hawaiians were inventive in using local vege- - .
tside tation, weaving fabrics as well as making materials and fishing nets from grass. Po-
neg litically, Hawaii was organized into regional kingdoms, which were highly warlike.
eve Society was structured into a caste system with priests and nobles at the top, who
Such d teserved many lands for their exclusive use. Commoners were viewed almost as a sep-
ding arate people, barred from certain activities.
cipal Thus, with a Neolithic agricultural technology and no use of metals, the Hawaiians

created a complex culture on their islands. Without a written language, their legends and
oral histories, tracing the genealogies of chiefly families back to the original war canoes,
provided a shared set of stories and values.
alties
-_ 9.4.3 Isolated Achievements by the Maori
nie 3 Another group of Polynesians migrated thousands of miles to the southwest of the Soci-
The ety Islands, perhaps as early as the eighth century, when canoe or raft crews discovered
sion the two large islands that today make up New Zealand. The original numbers of peo-
ifthe. ple were small but were supplemented over the centuries that followed by additional
ythe migrations from the Polynesian home islands. The Polynesians in New Zealand, called
nite the Maori, Successfully adapted to an environment considerably colder and harsher than
ricas- that of the home islands. They developed the most elaborate of all Polynesian art and

tory Ptoduced an expanding population that may have reached 200,000 people by the eigh-
teenth century, primarily on the northern of the two islands. As in Hawaii, tribal military
Jeaders and priests held great power in Maori society; each tribe also included a group of
Slaves drawn from prisoners of war and their descendants. All these achievements were

la .

accomplished in total isolation from the rest of the world and, particularly after 1400,
ie ’
: y amid substantial isolation of each major island grouping from the rest of the Polynesian
sic

“smplex. Polynesians would be the last of the major isolated cultures to encounter the


--- End of Page 15 ---
228 = Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

larger world currents brought forcefully by European explorers in the eighteenth centy

When this encounter did come, it produced the same effects that it had in the Americas i

vulnerability to disease, weakness in the face of superior weaponry and technology, ang

cultural disintegration.

Thinking Historically
The Problem of Ethnocentrism

Many cultures encourage an ethnocentric outlook, and the
culture of the West is certainly one of them. Ethnocentrism
creates problems in interpreting world history. The dictionary
definition of ethnocentrism is “a habitual disposition to judge
foreign peoples or groups by the standards and practices
of one’s own culture or ethnic group”—often finding them
inferior. Most of us take pride in many of our own institutions
and values, and it is tempting to move from this pride to a
disapproval of other peoples when they ciearly do not share
our behaviors and beliefs. Many Americans have a difficult
time understanding how other peoples have failed to establish
the democratic political structure of our own country.
Even liberals who pride themselves on a sophisticated
appreciation of different habits in some areas may adopt an
ethnocentric shock at the oppression (by current American
standards) of women that is visible in certain societies today
or in the past. Indeed, unless a person is almost totally
alienated from his or her own society, some ethnoceniric
reactions are hard to avoid.
Nevertheless, unexamined
ethnocentrism can be a barrier
in dealing with world history. We
will grasp other times and places
better, and perhaps use our own

Controlling ethnocentrism does

not mean abandoning all stan-

dards, as if any social behavior
were as good as any other.

of time. They may differ from our taste, but their patterns
respond to valid causes and problems. Our own values

are nat without complexity. We sometimes believe things. j
about our own society that are not as true as we want, or
in judging other societies, we forget about drawbacks in our —
own surroundings. Perspective on our own habits, including
awareness of how other cultures might judge us, helps us ¥

restrain our ethnocentrism.

However, ethnocentrism may become a _ particularly —

strong impulse in dealing with some of the changes in world

history taking shape around 1400. The West was gaining —

strength. Because many Americans identify with Westem
civilization, it is tempting to downplay some of the subtleties
and disadvantages of this process or to exaggerate the extent
to which the West began to organize world history more
generally.

The balance of power among civilizations was beginning to
shift around 1400, and itis legitimate —not simply ethnocentric—
to note that the West's rise was
one of the leading features of this
change. It is unnecessary to ignore
the many other patterns continuing
or emerging—including new vigor
in several other societies—or to

values more intelligently, if we
do not too readily dismiss cultures in which “objectionable”
practices occur.

Ethnocentrism is not just an issue for modern Westerners.
Civilized peoples in the past routinely accused outsiders
of barbaric ways, as in the Islamic characterizations of the
Mongols described in Chapter 3. But the current power of
Wesiern standards makes our own ethnocentric potential
a real issue today in dealing with world history, as in the
tendency to dismiss any people who did not exploit the latest.
available military technology as somehow inferior.

Controlling ethnocentrism does not mean abandoning
all standards, as if any social behavior were as good as
any other. It does involve a certain open-mindedness and
sophistication. Reducing distracting levels of ethnocentrism
can be aided by some specific procedures. It is important to
realize that few cultures behave irrationally over long periods

gloss over the very mixed moiives
and results that the West's rise entailed. The rise of the West
was not just “good.” It did not result simply from a triumph
of progressive values. It did depend heavily on new uses of
force. At the same time, avoiding ethnocentric impulses in
evaluating this crucial transition period in world history does

“not require a systematically anti-Western approach. Balance

and perspective are essential—which is easy to say, but not
always easy to achieve.

Review Questions:
1. Why can ethnocentrism complicate interpretations of
world history?
2. How can one balance disapproval and understanding
in dealing with practices such as female infanticide?
3. What are some non-ethnocentric ways to interpret initial
European expansion?


--- End of Page 16 ---
Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 229

icas, 94.4 Adding up the Changes

It is tempting to see some sort of master plan in the various changes that began to occur
around 1400. People who emphasize an ethnocentric approach to world history, stressing
some inherent superiorities in Western values, might be tempted to simplify the factors
involved. However, a series of complex coincidences provides a more accurate explana-
tion, as in other cases in which the framework of world history changed substantially—
though it is true that reactions to the decline of the Mongols did activate a number of

changes. Independent developments in the Americas-and elsewhere figured in, as did

i crucial policy decisions in places such as China. Each of the separate steps can be ex-
plained, but their combination was partly accidental.
a Several elements of the world history transition deserve particular attention. Tech-
«al ; nology played a role, as opportunities to copy Asian developments were supplemented
by European initiative, particularly in gunnery and ship design. The role of individuals,
“a such as Prince Henry, must be compared with the impact of more general forces, such as
° a Europe’s international trade woes.
vaing The overall result of change affected even societies where existing patterns persisted.
slg Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, was not experiencing great political or cultural shifts
around 1400. Regional kingdoms fluctuated: The empire of Mali fell to regional rivals,
ual but another Muslim kingdom, Songhay, soon arose in its stead, flourishing between
“on 1464 and 1591. African political and religious themes persisted for several centuries, but
unng the context for African history was shifting. The decline of the Arabs reduced the vital-
ist ity of Africa’s key traditional contact with the international network, although African
teties merchants remained comfortable in dealing with North Africa and the Middle East. In
a contrast to the Europeans, Africans had no exchange with the Mongols. Even as Africa
mn enjoyed substantial continuity, its power balance with Western Europe was beginning to
ingta alter, and this became a source of further change.
itric—
» was ~
ad Global Connections and Central Themes
veel 1450 and the World
or to = The first half of the fifteenth century saw both change and they began to pay attention to other contacts as well. Overall,
otives continuity in the contacts that affected so many societies in at a time of many regional changes, the defining relationship
West = Asia, Africa, and Europe. Change came in the procession of to the patterns of global contact was a vital one, and by 1450
umph = Societies that served as active agents for contacts. Muslim it was in flux.
ies of | traders and missionaries from the Middle East continued The key continuity involved the interest and dependence
‘es in to be active, particularly in the Indian Ocean and in dealing of many societies on interregional trade and other contacts.
does = with Africa. But the period of Mongol consolidation had African merchants and leaders continued to rely heavily
lance ij introduced a new set of contacts, many of them land-based on interactions with the Middle East. Western Europe’s
it not and involving Asia and Europe. Mongol overlords turned out to involvement in contacts was intensifying. Southeast Asia
: be delighted to encounter different ideas and to use officials was increasingly drawn in, not only to trade but also to
from many different places .and cultures. Mongol decline Muslim missionary efforts. The Middle East, India, and China
returned attention to sea-based contacts, particularly in the continued to welcome the availability of goods and merchant
f Indian Ocean. This was where, for a brief time, China took its activities beyond their own borders, even though their regional
unusually active stance. The Mongol era left other impacts economies remained robust. The diverse advantages of Afro-
ng a8 well: Japan, proud of its avoidance of Mongol occupation Eurasian contacts were widely realized, even amid changes in
2 'N contrast to China, began to think in terms of greater self- trade routes and regional initiatives.
aitial Sufficiency, with less reliance on imitation and elaborate Developments in the decades around the mid-fifteenth
Contacts with China. Russian leaders, initially around Moscow, century both reflected and intensified the transcontinental
— began to gain greater independence from Mongol control; network. The level of intercontinental connections developed

their chief goal involved further expansions of territory, but

in the postclassical period allowed increasingly rapid


--- End of Page 17 ---
230. Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

imitation in areas like technology. This gave once-backward
societies, like Western Europe, a chance to accelerate their
economic and military development. The networks also
brought sufficient advantages, in access to luxury consumer
goods, that the decline of one trade system—for example,
the overland Mongo! routes once the Mongol holdings began
to shrink—quickly brought forward other societies eager

to develop an alternative framework—the Chinese, then
the Europeans. This process, from the Mongols onward, e
quickened the pace of contact, from ambitious travelers
like lbn Battuta and Marco Polo, to imaginative Merchants of
and explorers. The stage was set for the next phase in the =i

first time, be directly involved.

Further. Readings

On the Chinese expeditions: Edward Dreyer, Zheng He, Chi-
na and the Oceans in the Early Ming, 1405-1433 (2007); Louise
Levathes, When China Ruled the Seas: The Treasure Fleet of the
Dragon Throne, 1405-33 (1996).

An important, highly readable interpretation of the
West’s.rise in a world context is C. Cipolla, Guns, Sails, and
Empires: Technological Innovation and the Early Phases of Eu-
ropean Expansion, 1400-1700 (1985). See also John M. Hob-
son, The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization (2004); and K.
Ciggaar and M. Metcalf, eds., East and West in the Medieval
Eastern Mediterranean (2006). An important interpretation
of new Western interests is S. W. Mintz, Sweetness and Pow-
er: The Place of Sugar in Modern History (1985).

On the Black Death and economic dislocation, see
M. W. Dols, The Black Death in the Middle East (1977); W. H.
McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (1976); and the very readable
B. Tuchman, A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century
(1979). A provocative study of relevant Western outlook is
P. Ariés, The Hour of Our Death (1981).

Critical Thinking Questions

1. What were the consequences of the fall of the Byz-
antine Empire? Was this a short-term or long-term
change in world history?

2. What was new about Renaissance culture? Is it
possible to use a cultural change of this sort to
explain innovations in trade and exploration?

3. What caused the main differences between.
developments in West Africa and those in

4
globalization process, in which the whole world would, for the ‘
2

J. Huizinga, The Waning of the Middle Ages (1973), deals:
with the decline of medieval forms in Europe. See also Gerald
MacLean, ed., Re-Orienting the Renaissance: Cultural Exchanges
with the East (2005). On the Renaissance, Walter Pater, The Re
naissance: Studies in Art and Poetry (2011); Gary Fergusan, Queer
i re)readings of the French Renaissance (2008); Guido Ruggiero, —
Machiavelli in Love: Sex, Self, and Society in the Italian Renaissance
(2007); Manfredo Tafuri, Interpreting the Renaissance: Princes
Cities, Architects (2006); John Jeffries Martin, ed., The Renais. —
sance: Italy and Abroad (2003); and Richard Mackenney, Rennis-
sances: The Cultures of Italy c. 1300-c. 1600 (2005). On Spain,
see FE. Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World,
2 vols. (1978); and E. Paris, The End of Days (1995), on Spanish
Jews and the Inquisition. On expansion in general, see Robert
Bartlett, The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization, and Cul-
tural Change (1993). :

An excellent overview of the period is Janet L. Abu-
Lughod’s Before European Hegemony: The World System
A.D. 1250-1350 (1989).

Western Europe during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries?

4. Should China have maintained its commitment
to great expeditions? Is this a valid historical
question?

5. What distinctive features of Polynesian society
reflected lack of contact with other major centers?

|
i
|
|
|
|
:
.
|
)


--- End of Page 18 ---
