Chapter 6

Europe in the Mongol Era

nane Wo

og!

“
ah

Whe

WV4 Contents and Learning Objectives

After reading each section, you should be able to answer these questions:

6.1 Eastern Europe
How and why was the Byzantine Empire in decline?

6.2 Eastern Europe under Mongol Attack
What was the impact of the Mongols on Eastern Europe?

Figure 6.1

Having experienced many close
calls with the weather during his
years at sea, St. Godric was troubled
an starmy nights for the rest of his
life, thinking of the peril of sailors.

He is best remembered for his
extraordinary affinity for wild animals.
He protected hunted animals and is
said to have allowed snakes to warm
themselves at his fire. |

British Library, MS Cotton Faustina B, VI
part ii, folio 16v {see entry for Godric in
the Oxford Dictionary of Saints).

147

148 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

6.3 Western Europe

What were some of the key changes in Western European politics
and culture during the later Middle Ages (1200-1450)? Did the region
have a distinctive political and cultural style?

6.4 Economy and Society

What were the main challenges and limitations in Western Europe's
social and economic structure between 1200 and 1450?

Sometimes an individual life displays the complexities of a larger society. Godric—
ultimately, Saint Godric—was a twelfth-century Englishman. His father was an ordinary
farmer, but he soon developed greater ambition. Godric started as a peddler and, accord-
ing to his biographer, quickly learned how to turn a profit on cheap items. He was physi-
cally strong and a hard worker—necessary qualities for a life of trade and travel, He soon
turned to urban commerce, which was beginning to increase rapidly during the 1100s. He
participated in seagoing trade with other ports of Britain and with the European conti-
nent, and he clearly made a good living, acquiring a number of ships.

But he was not entirely at peace with himself. His biographer, a clergyman named Reginald
of Durham, is eager to emphasize Godric’s consistent Christianity. He portrays Godric as con-
tent, with a simple life even amid his riches, and quickly attracted to the saints and a life of God.
He argues that Godric’s sea voyages, which were undoubtedly risky, helped the future saint
realize the importance of divine ajd—and surely religion did often provide a sense of security
to venturesome merchants. Finally, however, a purely material life did not seem sufficient.

Godric began visiting saints’ shrines with increasing frequency. He began to be dis-
turbed by the high living—feasting and drinking—of some of his merchant colleagues.
He also found that some of them stole outright. He attempted to correct them but was re-
buffed. Ashamed of his own materialism (and possibly of some misdeeds of his own), he
went on a pilgrimage to Rome. After thal, with his parents’ blessing, he decided to give
himself entirely to a religious life. He sold all of his goods, gave the proceeds to the poor,
and spent the rest of his life wandering as a religious hermit.

Few Europeans lived lives as polarized as that of Godric, but many, particularly in
growing cities, felt some tension between commercial change and religious commitment
(Figure 6.1). Could someone interested in making money keep a primary devotion to
God? Some, as Godric discovered, would choose commerce. Others opted for religion.
Still others worked for some combination. While few made Godric’s dramatic ultimate
choice, many merchants gave abundantly to the splendid churches of the cities, and not a

few made deathbed renunciations of their commercial pasts.

Europe in 1200 was already divided in principle between an eastern zone of Orthodox
Christianity and western Catholicism, though the boundary line between the two re-
gions was fuzzy. Besides religion, the leading trade routes of the period had oriented
both sections of Europe to north-south patterns (seeking to reach Constantinople and the
Mediterranean), rather than mutual east-west links. During the Mongol period east-west
divisions increased yet again, quite simply because much of Eastern Europe was taken
over directly by the Mongols, while Western Europe, free from invasion, be gan to benefit
significantly from the contacts the Mongol network facilitated.

Labi Jp id ASE

alii
—

Us S58 wry

1=3

Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongol Era 149

1203-1204 1303 1453
| Fourth Crusade, Westerners sack Seizure of ‘papacy by French king Otfoman Turks capture .
Constantirfiople - 13381453. i Constantinople; end of Byzantine
28 = (Empire  ~ + : i
12 Hundred Years’ War ¢ Hr
- Magna Carta 1348-1380 Ale RU ex
5 : Formation of. single Spariish
ap Blak Death (oubonic plague) onary SIE
ance
i hs 3 1480 oe
hd i “Expulsion of Tatars from Russia
Monguals (Tatars);capture Russia =a {
1265
First Parliament in England

Far more occurred.n this period than different kinds of interaction with the Mon-
gols, of course. Several societies in Eastern Europe encountered new difficulties even be-
fore the arrival of the Mongols. For Western Europe, long recovering from the fall of the
western Roman Empire, these centuries saw important innovations in a number of do-
mains, from family to new kinds of intellectual initiatives. Political structures remained
relatively weak and decentralized, but here too there were signs of change.

In 1204 a crusader force from the west, in theory on the way to bolster the Chris-
tian territory around Jerusalem, changed course and attacked and looted the great
Byzantine city of Constantinople—though it was a Christian center. This followed a
Byzantine attack on Catholic Christians living in the city, and it both reflected and
contributed to the growing weakness of the Byzantine state. The episode—technically
called the Fourth Crusade—severely worsened relationships between eastern and
western Christians. Some argue that relations have been improved only recently, for
the attack featured great brutality. While the Byzantine Empire was restored a few
decades later, it never really recovered. For Western Europe the episode marked a re-
duction of the kind of religious fervor that had inspired the early crusades, in favor of
growing interests in commercial advance and political rivalry. Europe was changing in
many ways.

6.1 Eastern Europe

How and why was the Byzantine Empire in decline?

The decline of the great Byzantine Empire had begun well before the violence of the
Fourth Crusade, after centuries in which the empire had fostered careful military and
political organization while serving as the center for Orthodox Christianity and a major
trade hub as well (Figure 6.2). Some important cultural activities continued, in both art
and philosophy, but the Byzantine economy and political apparatus clearly deteriorated.
As the empire weakened, Turkish migrants gained ground in many parts of the North-
ern Middle East, forming a kingdom east of Constantinople in the fourteenth century.
These Turkish peoples, ultimately called Ottomans, had converted to Islam in their Cen-
tral Asian homeland, and they brought considerable religious fervor as well as a taste for
political expansion into this new domain.

Several small Christian states also emerged in the Balkans, in Southeastern Eu-
rope, as Byzantium declined, headed by the kingdom of Serbia. But in 1382 the Otto-
man Turks crossed the Straits of the Dardanelles and entered the Balkans themselves,
defeating the Serbs in a hard-fought battle and converting the kingdom into a dependent
state before taking it over entirely in the fifteenth ceritury. Ottoman entry to the Balkans

Ottomans

A dynasty established
beginning in the thirteenth
century by Turkic peoples
from Central Asia. Though
most of their empire's early
territory was in Asia Minor, the
Ottomans eventually captured
Constantinople and made it
the capital of an empire that
spanned three continents and
lasted over 600 years.

150 Part ll: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 6.2

Dazzling mosaics from the early period of the Byzantine Empire
illustrate some of the highest achievements of Byzantine religious
art. This mosaic features a rather militant Christ the Redeemer.

would include some conversions fo Islam, though Christian-
ity persisted amid a largely tolerant Turkish state. Ultimately,
in 1453, the Turks would conquer Constantinople directly, of-
fectively putting an end to the Byzantine Empire entirely and
setting up a new political and religious configuration for the
whole region (Map 6.1).

6.2 Eastern Europe under
Mongol Attack

What was the impact of the Mongols on Eastern Europe?

Byzantine decline had also affected Russia and other parts of
Central Europe, again even before 1200. This was a region that
had strongly depended on trade exchanges with Constanti-
nople, and riew economic difficulties were almost inevitable.
The Russian king was increasingly embroiled in quarrels with
rival princes, meaning that a kingdom that had already been
rather loosely ruled became less effective. Loss of Byzantine
leadership also affected inicllectual life, though Russian Chris-
Hanity was firmly established, and traditions of religious art
persisted strongly.

B. O’Kane/Alamy Stock Photo

Then between 1237 and 1242 two successive Mongol in-
vasions easily subdued the major Russian cities. Called Ta-
tars by the Russians and feared and disliked—*"the accursed raw-eating Tatars,” as one
chronicle put it—the Mongols established their own capital. Local Russian rulers were
not displaced, but they had to spend some time at the Mongol court and pay various
forms of tribute. Trade lapsed in Western Russia, though some furs were still sold in
Constantinople before the Byzantine collapse. Russia was only lightly influenced by
Mongol culture, though some Russian nobles adopted Mongol-style dress and may have
picked up some new ideas about authoritarian rule. Christianity persisted, for the Mon-
gols were religiously tolerant, as did the production of Byzantine-style icons, or saints’
portraits, which became something of a Russian specialty.

Many Russian peasants either tried to flee from Mongol attacks or sought the protec-
tion of more powerful landowners—effectively becoming their serfs. The rise of Russian
serfdom would be a major feature of rural life for many centuries.

Some Russian towns, however, clearly benefited from Mon gol rule, taking ad-
vantage of new trading opportunities, particularly with Central Asia. Here too,
in forging new links with Central Asia, was an innovation in Russian history that
would have lasting consequences. Further, the city of Moscow benefited directly
from Mongol rule through the collection of tribute for the Mongol rulers. The city
itself was rebuilt and began to take control of the surrounding region. By the end of
the fourteenth century the princes of Moscow assumed leadership of efforts to free
Russia from Mongol control, winning several major battles and soon beginning to
push Mongol forces back toward Central Asia. Clearly, Mongol impact on Russia—
though remembered as a low point in the nation’s history—had mixed results, creat-
ing new opportunities for some though also increasing the separation of Russia from
the rest of Europe.

Mongol invaders had also poured into the kingdoms just west of Russia, notably
Poland and Hungary. Here the Mongols did not actually set up a state, as they were
called back to Central Asia to deal with political issues in their homeland. But their

a mer) gti

g Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongol Era 151

invasions had devastated the region,

Ma 1 EASTERN EUROPE AROUND 1400
and the kingdoms would take some p 6. yi 18

] Es

time to recover. —

By the late fourteenth century, pen wo |
however, several more positive de-
velopments took shape. In Poland

Catholic religious activity resumed, 2 i SW DE Bue i Batt of ok
: ~ Paps, Goa

backed by major monastic groups,
and a number of new cities were
formed. Increasing Jewish migra-
tion was encouraged, as Poland
emerged as the most tolerant state
in Europe, ultimately hosting up
to three-quarters of the total Jewish

population on the continent. Another : po Tee pt Ti NG kl fev
important state emerged in Lithua- Bl Ce fa ike) POLAND - { \ LL

i es i Sy ee pi AE a RIE / KHANATE.QF
nia. Eastern Europe—west of Russia, Qo iurt £7 Rie THE 57

north of the Balkans—increasingly
settled into a pattern of regional
kingdoms, often with extensive pow-
ers wielded by the aristocracy. Agri-
culture, centered on grain growing,
expanded in the period as well.

In Russia itself regional rulers,
headed by the dukes of Moscow,
began to expand their authority
against Mongol control, from the
1380s onward, winning several im-
portant military victories. By the
mid-fifteenth century the territory

around Moscow had effectively be- 0 0 NDMLOMEERS “7 Mediterranean Sea N
i ) ns DA TIDE y Cog ‘a . YE
come independent, and a new period - asa = : q |

of Russian expansion and political
development was on the horizon.

The period from 1200 to 1450 was certainly not a high point in Eastern European
history, with decline and invasion taking a considerable toll. In much of the region,
Mongol impact was both direct and damaging. But the rise or recovery of new states
in Russia and East-Central Europe was an important development by the end of the
period, while the consolidation of a new Ottoman Empire ushered in new patterns in
the Balkans and the Northern Middle East as well.

6.3 Western Biirope
What were some of the key changes in Western European palitics and culture

during the later Middle Ages (1200-1450)? Did the region have a distinctive political
and cultural style?

Patterns from the Germanic regions westward were quite different, in a region now free
from major invasion from the outside. Mongol conquests not only did not reach Western
Burope directly, but many Europeans were able to take advantage of Mongol rule to es-
tablish new and fruitful contacts with Asia. These contacts were one important element
in a set of new gains for the region.

152 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Black Death

Plague that struck Europe in
fourteenth century; significantly
reduced Europe’s population;
affected social structure.

After the fall of the great Roman Empire, Western Europe entered a period usually
called the Middle Ages—centuries characterized, among other things, by the spread
and impact of Catholic Christianity. Medieval Europe was long subject to invasion and
suffered from frequent disorder and limited urban life. Well before 1200, however, the
region began to experience a number of innovations, some of which persisted into the
fifteenth century.

Amid significant changes, Western Europe continued to lag behind Asia in a number
of important respects. Political units remained largely decentralized. Trade and produc-
tion advanced, but the region continued to depend on a somewhat inferior technology
overall; a key reason that new contacts with Asia were so important as was the access
they provided to inventions such as printing. Cities had gained some population, but
they were smaller than the major centers in Asia,.and the region continued to depend
primarily on locally focused agriculture. Western Europe was also deeply affected by
the new series of plagues in the fourteenth century—the fearsome Black Death (bubonic
plague) that originated in China and spread to the Middle East and then the European
continent, carrying off a third or more of the population. European cultural life also
faltered in some respects, amid diverse trends.

The Mongol period helped frame an important chapter in European development,
and the contrast with the obvious difficulties in Eastern Europe was clear as well. But
basic trends were decidedly mixed, with significant innovations balanced against new
challenges. As one result, the region became measurably less tolerant. The centuries after
1200 saw a number of new attacks on the Jewish minority (and in Spain, on the Muslim
minority as well), new laws directed against homosexuality, and new military attacks on
dissident Christian groups.

6.3.1 Political Patterns

By 1200, important monarchies had developed in France and Britain, and Spain would
soon join their ranks. Kings had developed complex relationships with leading noble
families, many of whom kept their own armies. Small bureaucracies served the kings
directly, along with a modest professional military force, though the kingdoms remained
very decentralized and often depended on the nobles for support. In France, for example,
King Philip II Augustus (1180-1223) used several methods to improve his position as
ruler. He expanded the territory under his control in a series of military campaigns. He
paid middle-class officials in his administration, regarding them as more loyal and more
talented than regional nobles. He was able to send some central officials into outlying
areas, to bolster royal control. And he used growing tax revenues to hire mercenary sol-
diers under his direct authority. Here, clearly, was the nucleus of a more effective central
government. But it had serious limits, as regional nobles had considerable independence,
and even the king had to be sure to select aristocrats as military generals. Monarchy re-
mained a balancing act in Western Europe.

Stronger governments brought some other changes. Headed by France, several of
the monarchies sought to rein in the power of the pope, who was often regarded more as
a political rival than as a religious leader. As Christian victories against Muslims in Spain
mounted—a Christian victory in 1212 reduced Spanish Islam to scattered local holdings,
particularly around the city of Granada—new governments were established on the pen-
insula. Then in 1375 two regional units, Castile and Aragon, effectively united, creating
a more powerful Spanish monarchy (Map 6.2). In turn, this government, along with the
monarchy established in Portugal, began actively sponsoring new voyages of explora-
tion along the Atlantic coast of Africa—a major initiative.

However, the major monarchies were also marked, from the thirteenth century on-
ward, by important new limitations on royal power. In 1215 powerful nobles in Britain,
resenting the efforts of an unpopular king to try to raise revenues, forced the ruler to

hi

Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongo! Era 153

sign the Magna Carta. This document
carefully limited royal power by re-

Map 6.2 WESTERN EUROPE TOWARD THE END OF THE MIDDLE AGES, C. 1380

quiring permission from the nobles
to raise tax levels and agreement from
the church in the appointment of re-
ligious officials. The Magna Carta
even called for creation of a council of
nobles to serve as a check on the royal
government.

Later in the thirteenth century
these principles were more clearly
translated into action, through the cre-
ation of parliaments. The first British
parliament met in 1265, with a House
of Lords representing the nobility
and church leaders, and a House |
of Commons drawn from wealthy |
townspeople. The British parliament
insisted that kings receive parliamen-
tary permission before instituting any
new taxes; and through this power, |
they could also advise the monarch |
on other issues. Similar parliaments
developed in France and in several
French regions, and also in Spain and
key states in Germany, during the
same period.

The rise of parliaments was an

[21 Holy Roman
Empire

ATLANTIC ~

[1] 150

0 150

300 MILES

300 KILOMETERS

. hy eo No
oN

Mediterranean

de =

[+]
NIGHTS

Ii
DENMARK,
3 oF s

ST

Sea
i eh

important development in European
political history, marking a clear be-

Near the end of the postclassical period, strong monarchies had consolidated their holdings,
and boundaries between states were coming into sharper focus.

lief that the growing power of kings
should be controlled. Developments
were still somewhat tentative: Parliaments met, for example, only when kings called
them, which limited their effectiveness. And of course these were in no sense democratic
bodies, for they represented only a small upper slice of the population. The dance be-
tween kings and parliaments would remain complex for many centuries.

In addition to working to expand their powers, and also usually to ensure relatively
peaceful transmission of authority from one monarch to the next through inheritance,
European kings continued to regard war as an important mission. French and British
forces clashed recurrently, for example, over British claims over some territories in
France. In the fourteenth century a long though intermittent war resulted — the Hundred
Years” War, though in fact it lasted longer than this — in which, ultimately, the French
proved victorious.

Other parts of Western Europe were not for the most part organized into even par-
tially successful central political structures. Germany was in principle ruled by an em-
pero, but in fact the region was a network of decentralized states controlled directly by
some bishops, or local nobles, or even cities. Regional nobles also effectively controlled
the Low Countries, though city administrations gained increasing voice. Italy was also
a patchwork of regional monarchies and city-states—with territories directly controlled
by the pope adding to the diversity. Key Italian city-states began to gain significant
new authority from the thirteenth century onward, sometimes governed by councils of
wealthy merchants, sometimes by a self-appointed ruling family closely connected to the
merchant class. Several of these states, benefiting from growing trade revenues, began

Magna Carta

Great Charter issued by King
John of England in 1215;
confirmed feudal rights against
monarchical claims; represented
principle of mutual limits and
obligations between rulers and
feudal aristocracy.

parliaments

Bodies representing privileged

groups; institutionalized feudal

principle that rulers should consult

with their vassals; found in England,
Spain, Germany, and France,

Hundred Years’ War

Conflict between England and
France from 1337 to 1453; fought
over lands England possessed in
France and feudal rights versus
the emerging claims of national
states.

154 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Thomas Aquinas

[Thomas ah-KWY-nuhs]
(1225-1274) Creator of one of
the great syntheses of medieval
learning; taught at University of
Paris; author of several Sumas;
believed that through reason

it was possible to know much
about natural order, moral law,
and the nature of God.

to establish additional government functions, such as patronizing the arts, conducting
censuses and other inquiries, and even appointing official diplomats to represent the city
to other powers. At the same time many of the Italian city-states frequently engaged in
bitter regional warfare.

Overall, the period from 1200 to 1450 in Western Europe saw a rather complex mix
of political developments, in what remained a very divided subcontinent. Government
powers and functions grew in several cases, but amid some new checks and. distractions.
No European government at this point matched the structure or range of activities of
some of the leading Asian regimes.

6.3.2 Cultural Patterns

Key cultural trends in the thirteenth centiry capped a momentum that had begun some-
what eailier. Improved resources facilitated significant new church building, much of it
in the Gothic style that served, as an architectural hallmark of this period in European
history. In France, for example, 80 new cathedrals

Figure 6.3

were built between 1180 and 1270 (Figure 6.3).

Creativity showed also in the continuing
effort to integrate classical philosophy and Chuis-
tian theology; debates over the respective roles of
faith and reason mirrored earlier discussions in the
Islamic Middle East, partly through the translation
of some of the key Middle Eastern texts. The theo-
logian Thomas Aquinas, an Italian monk working
in Paris, sought to sum up all relevant knowledge
in a massive series of books—called Summas, or
compendia, of all important knowledge. Aquinas
made it clear that faith always must come first, but
he greatly expanded the scope for human reason
- including the human capacity to understand the
natural order. Aquinas also sought to show how
reason could supplement faith in providing clear
ethical guidelines, not only for personal behavior
but in economic life as well.

An expanded scope for rational philosophy
also helped promote some new work in science,
again from the thirteenth century onward. To be
sure, many university faculty members rather
mindlessly promoted memorization of the great
Greek scientific and mathematical works. But
some practical research emerged as well. For ex-
ample, around Oxford University, in England,
clergymen such as Roger Bacon worked on optics,
expanding previous findings by Muslim scholars.
One important product of this work was the in-
vention of eyeglasses. Research in chemistry and
astronomy also advanced. This was not, as yet, a
huge outpouring, and it was overshadowed by the
continued emphasis on religious faith, but it did

The cathedral of Notre-Dame (Our Lady) at Amiens, France, is a grand example set a basis for later work.

of Gothic architecture, which flourished during the later Middle Ages in Western
Europe. The cathedral, which dwarfs the surrounding buildings, was built between
1220 and 1402 and was the tallest building in Europe at the time of its completion.

In the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
however, formal philosophy became increasingly

lan Dagnall/Alamy Stock Photo

narrow. No one clearly maintained the kind of

i
3
1
El

Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongol Era 155

vision Aquinas had represented, and indeed many religious authorities now criticized
Aquinas for giving too much play to human reason. A movement called scholasticism,
go named because of its base in the schools and universities, began to feature endless and
rather sterile debates over questions such as how many angels could dance on the head
of a pin.

Partly because of this seeming dead end, and the declining intellectual vitality of
many of the universities, creative emphasis shifted to some new directions. In both
France and England, a growing number of writers began to explore themes in their own
vernacular languages, rather than relying on Church Latin. Geoffrey Chaucer (d. 1400)
would become known as the effective father of English literature, writing a series of
lively stories about popular behavior and mixing Christian piety with a delight in
earthy themes. Chaucer's famous Canterbury Tales poked fun at the hypocrisy of many
Christians while also capturing some of the small tragedies of human existence. The
French poet Francois Villon, writing around 1450, wrote about some of his criminal
encounters with the police and other worldly topics in a lyrical French style. He also
conveyed, in largely secular terms, some of the terror and poignancy of death. Clearly,
the thematic range and the linguistic variety of European literature were expanding in
important ways.

Various European authors also began to develop poems and stories emphasizing
courtly love—the great passion that could draw men and women together, though
appropriately restrained by manners and morality. For example, Christine de Pisan—an
Italian woman working in France—wrote a series of ballads dedicated to leading female
aristocrats and members of the royal family, including love themes but also fanciful
renderings of older Greek stories recast to praise the French monarchy.

Work in the visual arts-—including, of course, the great churches—continued to em-
phasize religious scenes in Northern Europe. Some historians have argued that, by the
fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, some of this religious art was becoming less creative,
more crowded and mechanical, possibly sharing some of the same kinds of cultural
fatigue that was showing up in philosophy.

In the Italian city-states, however, a newer kind of artistic movement was taking
shape, reflecting a revival of interest in classical styles and themes and a reduction—
though not an elimination—of religious focus. Growing trade wealth and the secu-
lar interests of the city-state rulers, eager to demonstrate their success by patronizing
great works of art, contributed to the cultural momentum. Thus Italian architects began
to revive classical styles for both churches and public buildings, instead of the Gothic
style that remained dominant to the north. In painting, Giotto (d. 1337) introduced a new
understanding of perspective, far different from the stylized religious figures that had
previously predominated, though still focused on religious themes. Later Ttalian artists
would extend these findings and also deal with secular subjects from the classical past as
well as Christian scenes. )

In literature writers such as Dante (d. 1321) expressed themselves in Italian, though
some use of Latin persisted. Dante wrote eloquently about religious subjects, as in his
Divine Comedy, but also about more secular issues such as the depth and restraint of
courtly love. Later in the fourteenth century Francesco Petrarch would work more spe-
cifically on classical materials, as in his rediscovery of the letters of the Roman politician
Cicero, but he also authored lyric love poetry and spent a considerable amount of time
touting his own individual achievements. Only at the end of his life would he wonder if
he had strayed too far from religion—an obvious tension as Italian work in literature and
philosophy broadened out.

These cultural developments—the revival of classical styles and themes, the focus
on this-worldly subjects, the pride in sheer literary and artistic skill and innovation—
added up to the first phase of what would ultimately be called the Renaissance, offering
a very different set of emphases from those that had characterized European culture

scholasticism

Dominant medieval
philosophical approach; so
called because of its base in
the schools or universities;
based on use of logic to resolve
theological problems.

Gothic

An architectural style that
developed during the Middle
Ages in Western Europe;
featured pointed arches and
flying buttresses as external
supports on main walls.

Francesco Petrarch
[PEE-trahrk] (1304-1374) One of
the major literary figures of the
Western Renaissance; an Italian
author and humanist.

Renaissance

[REHN-uh-sahns] Cultural and
political movement in Western
Europe; began in Italy c. 1400,
rested on urban vitality and
expanding commerce; featured
literature and art with distinctly
more secular priorities than
those of the Middle Ages.
156 Part li: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 6.4

On the night of March 20, 1212, the Count of
Sasso-Rosso’s 18-year-old daughter, Clare, stole
away from her father’s house to dedicate herself
to a life of poverty and holiness. She resisted all
attempts by her father to bring her home and

by the church to persuade her to accept some
income as a guarantee against starvation for her
order, which depended entirely on the begging of
local friars for its daily bread. Clare was named
abbess of a convent just three years later, and
she never again left its grounds. Her sisters, her
mother, and an aunt followed her into the order.
She was canonized Saint Clare of Assisi in 1255.

Chronicle/Alamy Stock Photo

since the rise of Christianity. The impact of these developments would
echo more widely in Europe after 1450, as the Renaissance continued and
expanded.

Popular culture in Europe was not fully captured by the more formal in-
tellectual and artistic developments, though writers like Chaucer and Villon
did try to express the experience of ordinary people. The expansion of city

- life was accompanied by significant new forms of popular piety from the late

eleventh century onward. Particularly interesting was the growing enthusi-
asm for the veneration of Mary, the mother of Jesus, seen as an important
source of religious healing and a merciful intermediary between ordinary
people and God. Growing interest in the worship of several of the saints
showed a similar interest i in more accessible symbols of piety and holiness
(Figure 6.4). Participation i in religious pilgrimages to regional holy sites—
described so vividly by Chaucer—mixed popular religious commitment
with more earthly entertainments. Popular Christianity also maintained a
strong belief in magic and magical rituals—to deal with problems like infer-
tility, for example—which Christian leaders disapproved of but largely held
back from attacking.

Popular piety suggested one other potential tension in the broader con-
text of Western European culture and politics by the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries. The Catholic Church at this point featured many officials whose
secular interests were at least as great as their religious commitments. This
was not an unprecedented tension—earlier movements had worked to re-
emphasize religious goals—but it was gaining renewed notice. Many lead-
ing churchmen, often personally wealthy, spent a great deal of their time
in the political sphere. At the top, the papacy was increasingly involved in
tensions with some of the leading monarchs and also firmly planted in the
context of the Italian city-states, participating actively in regional wars and
political alignments. Many popes also were drawn to the enticing culture of
the Renaissance, actively patronizing the new artistic styles. It was not hard
to see some gap between these interests and the concerns of more ordinary
Christians.

A few regional leaders began to highlight this tension. In England John
Wycliife, a religious scholar, attacked the privileges of the Catholic clergy
and urged more attention to ordinary religious interests. He pioneered in
translating parts of the Bible into English to make the New Testament more
directly accessible. His followers attacked other aspects of the Church, in-
cluding the position of pope itself.

Wycliffe's work strongly influenced a Czech priest, Jan Hus (d. 1415), who simi-
larly denounced the moral failings of the clergy and the political preoccupations of the
pope. His ideas spread widely in the region, where resentment of the Church hierarchy

ran high.

None of this as yet added up to a major religious crisis. The pope moved actively
against Hus, who was ultimately burned at the stake for heresy. But many followers re-
mained unrepentant, and concerns.about Church doctrines and policies would bubble
up again after 1500, this time far more seriously.

The centuries between 1200 and 1450 constituted an important cultural moment for
Western Europe, in part because major developments did not neatly cohere. Catholic
Christianity continued to shape cultural activities in many ways. But the declining hold
of Latin, the rise of new kinds of artistic styles and literary themes, the surge of popular
piety, even the declining vitality of university-based philosophy, all suggested consid-
erable cultural turmoil, which in turn would continue to shape—and shake—European
culture for many decades after 1450.

er

p

§
LY
4
i

Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongol Era 157

Thinking Historically
Western Civilization

IN RECENT YEARS, HISTORIANS HAVE BEEN critically
examining the term “Western civilization,” which is sometimes
(wrongly) taken as self-evident.

The concept of “the West” or “Western civilization” was
actively used in the twentieth-century Cold War with the Soviet
Union, vet it is hard to define. We have seen that the classical
Mediterranean world did not directly identify a “Western”
civilization, and this classical heritage was used most selectively
by postclassical Western Europe. Classical Mediterranean
civilization would strongly influence Eastern Europe and also
the Arab world; it was not a distinctively “Western” preserve,
though Western inteflectuals and artists would often refer to
classical values. Further, the consistent absence of political
unity in Western Europe complicates
any definition of common structures.

Defining Western civilization

who were often in conflict and sometimes engaged in name-
calling (the English were “les goddams,” because they swore so
much, and the French were “frogs” because of what they ate).
Until very recently, Europeans thought in terms of distinctive
national histories, not European ones. But it is possible to
define some common features that differentiated Europeans
from thase of neighboring civilizations. Even as the civilization
began to change, late in the postclassical period, it preserved
some common directions. Debate continues about the balance
between the Western and more purely national features.
Defining Western civilization is also complicated in
the postclassical period because Western leaders copied
so much from other societies. They eagerly learned of
new technologies from Asia. They
benefited from Arab mathematics and

Western Europeans could not is also complicated...because philosophy, and they imitated Muslim

have identified Western civilization
in the postclassical period, but they

Western leaders copied so
much from other societies.

commercial law on how to treat
tradespeople from outside the locality.

would have recognized the concept
of Christendom, along with some difference between their
version of this religion and that of Eastern Europe. The first
definition of this civilization was primarily religious, although
artistic forms associated with religion also figured in this
definition. Regional cultures varied, of course, and there was
no linguistic unity, but cultural developments in one area—for
example, the creation of universities, which started in Italy—
surfaced elsewhere fairly quickly. Supplementing culture were
some reascanably common social structures — like manors and
guilds—and trade patterns that increasingly joined Northern
and much of Southern Europe. The resulting civilization was
by no means as coherent as Chinese civilization; many of its
members detested each other, like the English and French,

But even in imitating, most Europeans
were keenly conscious of their distinctiveness as Christians.
They sometimes resented the societies they copied from.
Toward the end of the Middle Ages, as Europeans began to
seek a new role in the world at large, the openness to imitation
also began to decline, as part of the further definition of a
Western or European identity.

Review Questions:

1. Was there a Western civilization before the postclassical
period? What were the defining features of Western
civilization by the end of the postclassical period?

2. How does the definition of Western civilization today
compare to that of the postclassical period?

6.4 Economy and Society

What were the main challenges and limitations in Western Europe's social and
economic structure between 1200 and 1450?

As in philosophy, strong economic and social trends had taken hold in Western Europe
well before 1200 and would continue to define the major developments of the thirteenth
century. Population growth continued, as did the growth of cities. Agricultural produc-
tion advanced as well. Though many European peasants remained serfs, tied to service
and dues on their lords’ estates, internal trade grew, and a variety of merchants—from
France, but particularly from the port cities of Italy—reached out dynamically into the
Mediterranean and beyond, benefiting from new knowledge of the compass and ship de-
sign gained from contact with Islamic merchants. Banking institutions expanded, and the
Catholic Church began to modify some of its earlier hostility to bankers and merchants

158 Part ll: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 6.5

(Figure 6.5). European economic levels remained inferior to
those of Asia. The smaller size and lesser amenities of the
cities reflected the difference. But there was no question that
many Europeans were benefiting from some positive trends.

Significant trade levels carried into the fourteenth cen-
tury. Italian city-states like Venice and Genoa benefited from
the decline of Byzantium to extend their activities not only
in the Mediterranean but in the Black Sea, where, among
other things, they traded for Russian furs. Italian ships
crisscrossed the Mediterranean, often carrying Muslims
from places like North Africa on the pilgrimage to Mecca.

The growth of trade and banking by the fourteenth cen-
tury served as the origins of capitalism in Western Europe.
The greater Italian and German bankers and long-distance
merchants were clearly embraced capitalism in their will-
ingness to invest in trading ventures with the expectation
of profit. Given the dangers of trade by land and sea, the
risks in these investments were substantial, but profits of
100 percent or more were possible. In many cities, such as
London, groups of powerful merchants banded together to
invest in international trade, each buying shares in the ven-
ture and profiting or losing accordingly.

Individual merchants could amass—and lose—great
fortunes. Jacques Coeur (JAHK KUR) (c. 1395-1456), one of
Europe's most extraordinary merchants, demonstrated the
opportunities and risks of new forms of trade. The son of a
furrier, he married the daughter of a royal official and served
as a tax official until he was caught minting coins with less
valuable metals. He then founded a trading company that
competed with Italians and Spaniards in dealing with the
Middle East. He visited Damascus to buy spices, setting up
a regular trade in rugs, Chinese silk, and Indonesian spices
and sugar. He also became financial advisor and supplier
to the French king and was ennobled. With the largest fleet
ever owned by a French subject, Coeur surrounded himself

This fourteenth-century miniature shows views of a banking with splendor, even arranging with the pope for his 16-year-
house. People might keep money in banks, seek loans, ar arrange old son to become an ar chbishop. But he had enemies, man y

transactions with merchants in faraway centers of trade.

of them nobles in debt to him, and they turned the king

Album/Alamy Stock Photo

capitalism
Economic system based

on profit-seeking, private
ownership, and investment.

against him. Tortured, he admitted to various crimes, in-

cluding supplying weapons to Muslims. His property was confiscated, and—adventurer

to the last—he died on a Greek island while serving in a papal fleet against the Turks.

By world standards this was not a totally unprecedented merchant spirit. European
traders were still less venturesome and less wealthy than some of their Muslim counter-
parts. Nor was Western society as tolerant of merchants as Muslim or Indian societies

‘were. Yet Western commercial endeavors clearly were growing. Because Western gov-

ernments were weak, with few economic functions, merchants had a freer hand than in
many other civilizations. Many of the growing cities were ruled by commercial leagues.
Monarchs liked to encourage the cities as a counterbalance to the power of the landed
aristocracy, and in the later Middle Ages and beyond, traders and kings typically were
allied. However, aside from taxing merchants and using them as sources of loans, royal
governments did not interfere much with trading activities. Merchants even developed
their own codes of commercial law, administered by city courts. Thus, the rising merchant
class was staking out an unusually powerful and independent role in European society.

And: AT Ly de as®

Chapter 8: Europe in the Mongol Era 159

Capitalism was not yet typical of the Western economy, even aside from the moral
qualms fostered by the Christian tradition. Most peasants and landlords had not become
enmeshed in the market system. In the cities, the dominant economic cthic stressed group
protection, not profit making. The characteristic institution was not the international trad-
ing firm but the merchant or artisan guild. Guilds grouped people in the same business or ~~ guilds
trade in a single city, sometimes with loose links to similar guilds in other cities. These or- Sworn associations of people
ganizations were new in Western Europe, although they resembled guilds in various parts in the same business or craft
of Asia but with greater independence from the state. They stressed security and mutual in a single city; stressed
control. Merchant guilds thus attempted to give all members a share in any endeavor. If a security and mutual control;
ship pulled in loaded with wool, the clothiers’ guild of the city insisted that all members limited membership, regulated
participate in the purchase so that no one member would monopolize the profits. apprenticeship, guaranteed good
Artisan guilds were made up of the people in the cities who actually made cloth, workmanship; often satablighied
bread, jewelry, or furniture. These guilds tried to limit their membership so that all mem- fEARCHSE Within eicies.
bers would have work. They regulated apprenticeships to guarantee good training but
also to ensure that no member would employ too many apprentices and so gain undue
wealth. They discouraged new methods because security and a rough equality, not max-
imum individual profit, were the goals; here was their alternative to the capitalistic ap-
proach. Guilds also tried to guarantee quality so that consumers would not have to worry
about shoddy quality on the part of some unscrupulous profit-secker. Guilds played an
important political and social role in the cities, giving their members recognized status
and often a voice in city government. Their statutes were in turn upheld by municipal
law and often backed by the royal government as well.
Despite the traditionalism of the guilds, manufacturing and commercial methods
improved in medieval Europe, although the region still lagged well behind Asia in iron-
making and textile manufacture. In a few areas, such as clockmaking—which involved
both sophisticated technology and a concern for precise time initially linked to the sched-
ule of church services—European artisans led the world. Furthermore, some manufac-
turing spilled beyond the bounds of guild control. Particularly in the Low Countries and
parts of Italy, groups of manufacturing workers were employed by capitalists to produce
for a wide market. Their techniques were simple, and they worked in their own homes,
often alternating manufacturing labor with agriculture. Their work was guided not by
3 the motives of the guilds but by the inducements of merchant capitalists, who provided
them with raw materials and then paid them for their production.
Thus, by the later Middle Ages, Western Europe's economy and society embraced
many contradictory groups and principles. Commercial and capitalist elements jostled
against the slower pace of economic life in the countryside and even against the dom-
inant group protectionism of most urban guilds. Most people remained peasants, but
| a minority had escaped to the cities, where they found more excitement, along with in-
creased danger and higher rates of disease. Medieval tradition held that a serf who man-
: aged to live in the city for a year and a day became a free person. A few prosperous
capitalists flourished, but most people operated according to very different economic
values, directed toward group welfare rather than individual profit. This was neither a
static society nor an early model of a modern commercial society. It had its own flavor
and its own tensions—the fruit of several centuries of economic and social change.

6.4.1 Limited Sphere for Women

The increasing complexity of medieval social and economic life may have had one fi-
nal effect, which is familiar from patterns in other agricultural societies: new limits on
the conditions of women. Women’s work remained vital in most families. The Christian
3 emphasis on the equality of all souls and the practical importance of women’s monas-
] tic groups in providing an alternative to marriage continued to have distinctive effects
on women’s lives in Western society. The veneration of Mary and other female religious

160 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

figures gave women real cultural prestige, counterbalancing the biblical emphasis on Eve
as the source of human sin. In some respects, women in the West had higher status than
their sisters under Islam: They were less segregated in religious services (although they
could not lead them) and were less confined to the household. Still, women’s voice in the
family may have declined in the Middle Ages.

Urban women often played important roles in local commerce and even operated
some craft guilds, but they found themselves increasingly hemmed in by male-dominated
organizations. In contrast to Islam, women were not assured of property rights. By the
late Middle Ages, a literatute arose that stressed women’s roles as the assistants and
comforters to men, listing supplemental household tasks and docile virtues as women’s
distinctive sphere. Patriarchal structures seemed to be taking deeper root.

6.4.2 A Social and Economic Crisis

Western Europe's social and economic structure was deeply shaken in the middle of the
fourteenth century by the arrival of bubonic plague, spread through trading contacts
with the Middle East. Beginning in 1347 and extending for many decades, the Black
Death would kill up to a third of the total European population—and some recent esti-
mates are even higher—reversing the previous growth trends and causing massive shock
and dislocation. Cities and villages alike had to construct pits to contain the masses of
dead bodies. Scholars are still debating what caused the plague—rats were once blamed,
but now the focus is more on lice spread by unclean human beings—but the main point
is the rapidity and severity of the plague’s impact (Figure 6.6).

Many people sought to flee the cities, where the contagion was most obvious. For
some, the scourge prompted new religious fervor, in hopes of God's protection and for-
giveness. Hostility to Jews, gypsies, and other minorities increased, as some held them
responsible for an otherwise inexplicable disaster.

Labor supplies were disrupted. With workers in short supply, many sought to im-
prove wages or.working conditions to compensate for the shortage of workers. At the
same time, some landlords and other employers were trying to impose new burdens. In
France, problems were compounded by the costs and disruptions of the early stages of
the Hundred Years’ War.

Massive rural protests broke out in several regions, as

in France in 1358 and Britain in 1381. Peasants sought to
reduce the burdens of serfdom and gain fuller access to the
land. Many urban workers sought higher wages. A strong
cgalitarian streak ran through some of the protests. English
rioters proclaimed that, when humanity began in the days
of Adam and Eve, there was no noble class—and thus there
should be none now. Most of the riots were put down,
sometimes with great brutality, but—like the plague—they
would sometimes recur in later decades.

In the long run, the plague and associated tensions proba-
bly had two or three structural results. First, for some (though
not all) peasants, serfdom was loosened. Many peasants were
able to convert their annual payments and work service obli-
gations to a money rent, which might still be resented but was
often a bit easier to handle. A looser system of serfdom might
motivate peasants to increase their agricultural production,

This painting shows survivors at Tournai placing plague victims in
coffins before mass burial became the only way to keep up with the
deaths. The Black Death, which killed up to a third of the population
of Europe, devastated medieval society.

Photo 12/Archives Snarik/Alamy Stock Photo

and it also made it easier for people to move around seeking
work. These developments were gradual and uneven, but
they did alter some features of the labor market.

dc spot tion

nd iy] dem § ae (1

Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongol Era 161

Some historians believe, further, that labor costs in Europe began to rise above levels
in some other societies, as for a time economic activity grew more rapidly than popula-
tion did. It is vital to note that great poverty remained—this was not, overall, a wealthy
society. But some shifts may have begun that would affect economic decisions later on. *

Finally, and more certainly, family patterns began to change in distinctive ways.
Probably in order to protect property holdings against the burden of too many children,
most ordinary Western Europeans began to marry later—in their late twenties. The re-
sult increased the importance of the nuclear family—parents and their children—for the
simple reason that, when children were born to parents near or past 30 years of age,
their grandparents were likely to be quite old or even already deceased. Large, extended
families—common in many other societiés—could not be sustained in these conditions.
This new “European-style family” was certainly distinctive. It depended on fairly strict
controls over the sexual behavior of young adults, asked now to delay marriage until
well after puberty. It might promote more cooperation between husbands and wives in
the family itself, since they had few adult relatives to depend on. Here was another com-
ponent in the changing European social environment by 1450.

Gilad niles +

Global Connections and Central Themes

Europe and the World

European patterns during the period from 1200 to 1450 were
strongly affected by the rise (and then decline) of the Mongols,
though obviously they were not fully determined by this crucial
development. Mongol invasions and occupation had a deep
impact on much of Eastern Europe, along with the fading of the
Byzantine Empire and the influx of the Ottoman Turks. Russia's
position changed considerably, as ties to other parts of Europe
waned while interactions with Central Asia intensified.

Mongol impact on Western Europe was less profound, since
the region did not experience direct invasion. Developments in
this part of the continent reflected a number of factors, from
new reactions to royal initiatives in politics to the emergence of
a variety of new cultural interests. But the risa of the Mongols
did have decisive importance for Western Europe's contacts
with the wider world, particularly in expanding opportunities
for interaction with Asia. Travel to and from China, along with
steady growth in exchanges with the Middle East, stoked
appetites for wider trade and also increased European exposure
to more advanced technologies and political systems.

By 1200, thanks in part to the earlier crusades to the
Holy Land, some Europeans became increasingly aware of
the products available through greater trade with the Middle
East. Spices—including sugar, a highly valued sweetener for
upper-class. occasions, and an expensive one at that—gained
new attention, along with some manufactured products such
as metal wares. These contacts had also provided Europeans
with knowledge of new technologies such as the compass and
improved saifing ships (Map 6.3). Europeans had also imported
elements of Arab science and mathematics, plus artistic styles
and even the idea of a special commercial law. It was also from

the Arabs that Europeans learned how to manufacture paper,
setting up the region's first factory, in Sicily, at the end of the
thirteenth century. Knowledge of the superior numbering system
(which the Arabs had borrowed from India, but which Europeans
knew as “Arabic” numerals), spread —though gradually —as well,

Then came the establishment of the interlocking Mongol
states, which greatly facilitated overland travel from the Middle
East all the way to the Pacific Ocean. A number of Europeans
quickly took advantage of the opportunity to enter the Mongol
realm, usually from Persia, often obtaining letters assuring
safe conduct all the way to China. Popes sent Christian
missionaries, who had little luck converting the Chinese but
who did learn a lot about Chinese achievements. Several
European Jewish merchants traveled frequently back and
forth. And other European merchants did the same. Most
famous among them was the Venetian Marco Polo, whose
uncles had done the trip before and who set out himself in
1273, reaching China two years later. Polo dutifully noted
that the Chinese were “idolators”—that is, not Christian —but
otherwise he found much to admire, particularly the urban
standards of living and the sophisticated political structure.

And, of course, Polo wrote up his achievements in the
travel book that circulated extensively and helped inspire an
even wider literature, some of it fanciful but all directed at
stirring wider curiosity about other parts of the world.

More concretely, the contacts with China brought European
knowledge of an array of new technologies, as well as further taste
for spices and manufactured goods that could not, at least at this
point, be found in Europe proper. Chinese innovations in printing
yielded a number of European experiments by the first half of the

162 Part Il: The Mongo!l-Age, 1200-1450

ATLANTIC
OCEAN
Bm,

a0,

City sites of commercial fairs
W City sites of banking activities |*~ ©;

| ==-- Venice's commercial routes
—— Genoa's commercial routes
== Main land commercial routes

— ge.

n

fifteenth century, which by 1450 resulted in a superior system
of typesetting. Even earlier, in the fourteenth century, Europeans
learned of explosive powder—either from the Mongols, who
used it in their invasions of Eastern Europe, or possibly from the
Arabs, who had their own contacts with China. By the late 1300s
Europeans were employing cannons to besiege aristocratic
castles (and were also using them in the French-English conflicts
in the Hundred Years’ War), and by the end of the century had
also introduced handheld weapons—guns—as well. Contact
and imitation were beginning to reshape European patterns not
only in trade, but in warfare and intellectual life as well.

Many of these developments would have far greater
impact on European behavior after 1450 than before — printing,
most obviously, was literally only beginning to become
available. But the pattern of contacts experienced a final set of
adjustments even earlier, which would have their own impact
on European interests.

The decline of the Mongol Empire obviously disrupted
opportunities for overland travel to China, forcing renewed
attention on available sea routes. At the same time the
decline of Byzantium —though ironically hastened by Western
attacks —complicated familiar exchanges with the Middle East
and South Asia. The rise of the Ottoman Turks—and the fact
that as Muslims they were even more distrusted than Byzantine
Christians—would soon be seen as a military threat to Europe
north of the Balkans. Even before this, the Ottomans’ new
holdings were seen as jeopardizing merchant ventures.

By the fifteenth century, those Europeans concerned
with wide-ranging trade, or invested in some of the attractive
consumer products available from Asia, clearly faced
something of a dilemma. How could Mongol decline and
shifting power dynamics in the Middle East be addressed?
Options were just beginning to emerge by 1450, but some
were quite dramatic.

Chapter 6: Europe in the Mongol Era 163

Further Readings

On Byzantium, John Rosser, The A to 7 of Byzantium (2006);
Averil Cameron, The Byzantines (2006); Judith Herrin,
Byzantium: The Surprising Life of a Medieval Empire (2008);
J. M. Hussey and Andrew Louth, The Orthodox Church in
the Byzantine Empire (2010). See also Lynda Garland, ed.,
Byzantine Women: Varieties of Experience 800-1200 (2006).
On Russian history, Alfred Rambaud, The History
of Russia: From the Earliest Times to 1877 (2006); Nicholas
Riasanovsky, A History of Russia (2010 edition); Maureen
Perrie, ed., The Cambridge History of Russia (2006); Judith
Martin, Medieval Russia, 980-1584 (2007); Robert Mar-
shall, Storm from the East: From Genghis Khan to Khubilai
Khan (1993).
On leading developments in Western Europe, Judith
Bennett, Medieval Europe: A Short History (2010); Charles H.

Parker and Jerry H. Bentley, eds., Between the Middle Ages
and Modernity: Individual and Community in the Early Mod-
ern World (2007); Eric H. Mielants, The Origins of Capitalism
and the "Rise of the West” (2007). Larry Siedentop, inventing
the Individual: The Origins of Western Liberalism (2014). See
also R. 8. Lopez, The Commercial Revolution of the Middle
Ages 950-1350 (1976); Christopher Dyer, An Age of Tran-
sition? Economy and Society in England in the Later Middle
Ages (2005). On the Buropean-style family and its implica-
tions, Mary Hartman, The Household and the Making of His-
tory (2004). On the Italian Renaissance, Guido Ruggiero,
The Renaissance in Italy: A Social and Cultural History of the
Rinascimento (2015). For recent work on the Black Death,
Monica Green, ed., Pandemic Disease in the Medieval World:
Rethinking the Black Death (2014).

Critical Thinking Questions

1. Did the Mongols create important new differences
between Fastern and Western Europe?

2. Was Russian policy durably affected by the Mongol
invasions?

3. Why did Western European leaders find it difficult to
create large political units or regional empires?

4. What were the most important characteristics of
Western European civilization by 1450?

