.Postclassical Mesoamerica, 1000-1500 C.E.
What were the main features of the Toltec and Aztec empires?

Aztec Religious and Economic Structure
What were the main characteristics of Aztec society?

3 Aztec Society in Transition
_ What were the principal strengths and constraints of the Aztec
economy and social structure? .
84 Twantinsuyu: World of the Incas
_ What were the principal-causes of the expansion of the Inca Empire?

8.5 The Other Peoples of the Americas

__ What were the characteristic economic forms of American groups
_ outside the two great imperial territories?

Figure 8.1

The great Aztec city-state of
Tenochtitlan was established on
an island in the midst of a large
fake. Connected to the shores by
causeways and supplied with fresh
water by an aqueduct, it housed

a population estimated to be over
150,000. Early Spanish observers
compared its canals to Venice and
were fascinated by its markets
and gardens. To the Aztecs it was
the center of political and spiritual
power, or as they called it, “the
foundation of heaven.”

Island Capital of the Aztecs, Tenochtitlan
(mural), Covarrubias, Luis (1919-1987)/
Museo Nacional de Antropologia, Mexico
City, Mexico/Sean Sprague/Mexicolore/
Bridgeman Images

187

--- End of Page 1 ---
488 Part il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450 :
i
IF YOU CLIMBED THE STEEP STAIRWAY to the temple at its summit and looked out fron,
atop the great pyramid at its center, you could see that the splendid city of Tenochtitlay, Bs

capital of the Aztec Empire, rose from two islands in a large lake (Figure 8.1). All aroung —
its shores were densely settled towns and cities surrounded by cultivated fields. Canogs _ by]
constantly traversed the lake and entered the city through a maze of canals, large crowds _ The
trod across the causeways that linked the city and its markets to the shores, and in some - a
marshy areas, complex farming on “floating gardens” kept thousands of peasants at work: thai
The Mexica or Tenochca people (sometimes called the Aztecs) who built the city consid. r peo
ered it “the foundation of Heaven.” For them it was a sacred space as well as a thriving — ug
metropolis and the heart of their empire. ; Hl A
When the first Europeans saw Tenochtitlan in 1520, the city had a population of over —

150,000 and covered about 5 square miles, making it as large as contemporary Seville peo

waj

or Paris. The first Europeans who saw it were amazed. Some of them compared the city |
and its canals to Venice. Hernan Cortés, the Spanish captain who first entered the city,
reported that “the stone masonry and the woodwork are equally good; they could not
be bettered anywhere.” His companion, the foot soldier Bernal Diaz del Castillo, a man

usually given to plain speech, could not hide his admiration:

Gazing on such wonderful sights, we did not know what to say, or whether what
appeared before us was real, for on one side, on the land, there were great cities, and in
the lake ever many more, and the lake was crowded with canoes, and in the causeway
were many bridges at intervals, and in front of us stood the great city of Mexico.

Diaz del Castillo went on to describe the palaces and temples, the two-storied homes
of the nobles, the stuccoed buildings hung with garlands of flowers, the smell of the cedar
wood beams, the zoo, the aviary, the rooftop gardens, and the bustling markets filled
with everything from chocolate to elaborate textiles and from parrot feathers to precious
stones and slaves. The hum of the crowd in the great market, he said, could be heard

eee Re

miles away. Of course, there was much about the city that he did not understand, such — a
as the fact that each city ward was controlled by a kin group that cared for its temples; _
shrines, and palaces. Later, he came to understand that the purpose of temples was for.
ceremonies of human sacrifice, which he found appalling, but his overall impression was
one of admiration and wonder. i

Tenochtitlan, clearly a great urban center, was the largest of about 50 such city-states f
that dotted central and southern Mexico. They were the heirs of the long development of
civilization in the Americas, a process that seems to have taken place in relative isolation

from the other centers of world history.

The period from 1200 to 1450 saw many important developments in the Americas, par” Wh,
ticularly through the’ formation of great empires in Central America and the Andes— Afte
empires that can be compared to other ambitious states in the same period. But Americat enc
patterns were clearly distinctive in one respect: They occurred with no contact with’ the
societies in other parts of the world. They obviously were not influenced at all by the thes
great Mongol surge—like sub-Saharan Africa in this respect. But in contrast to Africa, the ado

ethi

Americas also had no other kinds of trading or cultural links with other civilizations
Afro-Eurasia. This isolation did not prevent great creativity in economic, cultural, and:


--- End of Page 2 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 189

_ political domains. But it would leave the region open to massive challenges when con-
tacts did begin to occur—after 1492,
By the mid-fifteenth century, the Americas were densely populated in many places
by peoples long, indigenous to the New World. These peoples were later called Indians. Indians
“="Fhat term of course, is derived.from-a mistake Columbus made when he thought he had misnomer created by Columbus
reached the Indies, what Europeans called India and the lands beyond, but the label is referring to indigenous peoples
also misleading because it implies a common identity among the peoples of the Americas _ of the New World; implies social
that did not exist until after the arrival of Europeans. Indian as a term to describe all the. - and: ethnic commonality among
-peoples of the Americas could have a meaning only when there were non-Indians from Dany series that did
which to distinguish them. Still, the term has been used for so long—and is stillin use Pt €x1st; still used to apply to
by many Native Americans today—that we will continue to use it along with the term Native Americans.
», Native Americans to describe the early peaples of the Americas.
As should already be clear, what we now call the Americas embraced many different
eoples with a vast array of cultural achievements. The variety of cultural patterns and
ways of life of pre-Columbian civilizations makes it impossible to discuss each in detail
here, but we can focus on a few areas where major civilizations developed, based on ear-
lier achievements. By concentrating on these regions, we can demonstrate the continuity
of civilization in the Americas. This chapter examines in some detail Mesoamerica, espe-
cially Central Mexico, and the Andean heartland. In both these areas great imperial states
were in place when European expansion brought them into direct contact with the Old
World. Discussed in less detail are a few areas influenced by the centers of civilization—
and some whose development seems to have been independent of them—to provide an
overview of the Americas on the eve of invasion.

1325

1471-1493
Fall cf Tula, Aztecs established in Central Mexico; | Inca Topac Yupanqui
disintegration of Tenochtitlan founded increases areas under
north coast of Peru Toltec Empire 1350 control
968 1200-1500 Incas established in Cuzco area 1493-1527
Tula established by Mississippian culture | 4494 Huayna Capac
‘Toltecs . flourishes Creation of tripie allianee in Mexico expands into Ecuador;
his death resutts in
ee 1434-1471 chal war
oltec conquest of Great expansion under Inca
Chichén itzé and Pachacuti 1502-1520
influence in Yucatan Reign of Mociezuma II
1434-1472.
Rule of Nezhualcoyot! at Texcoco
1438
Incas dominate Cuzco and southern
highlands
1440-1469 i
Reign of Moctezuma |.

8.1 Postclassical Mesoamerica,
1000-1500 c.z.

What were the main features of the Toltec and Aztec empires?

Afler the collapse by the great Mayan civilization before 900 ¢.z., Mesoamerica experi- Toltec culture
enced significant political and cultural change. In Central Mexico, nomadic peoples from Succeeded Teotihuacan culture
the north took advantage of the political vacuum to move into the richer lands. Among in Central Mexico; strongly I
these Peoples were the Toltecs, who established a capital at Tula about 968. Toltec culture militaristic ethic including

adopted many features from the sedentary peoples and added a strongly militaristic human sacrifice; influenced

ethic. This included the cult of sacrifice and war that is often portrayed in Toltec art and large territory after 1000 c.z,;

#] ., .
hat became a feature of Aztec society as well. Later Mesoamerican peoples, such as the declined after 1200 c.r.


--- End of Page 3 ---
190 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 8.2
Toltec political and cultural
influence spread from its capital at
Tula in Northern Mexico to places
as far south as Chichén Itza in
Yucatan. The colossal statues of
warriors shown here served as

~ columns that supported the roof of
a great temple.

Lukiyanova Natalia frenta/Shutterstock

Aztecs, had some historical memory of the Toltecs and thought of them as the givers
civilization. However, the archeological record indicates that Toltec accomplishments of
ten were fused or confused with even earlier societies, like the Mayans, in the memory of :
the Toltecs’ successors (Figure 8.2).

Toltec influence spread northward as well. Obsidian was mined in Northern Mexico, ;
and was probably traded for turquoise in the American Southwest. There are other ;
indications as well that the large settlements of the Mississippian culture that flourished
between 1200 and 1500 c.g. based on maize and bean agriculture probably had contacts
with Mesoamerica. Towns, usually located along rivers, had stepped temples made of _
earth, and sometimes large burial mounds. Some of the burial sites include well-produced _
pottery and other goods, and some burials seem to have been accompanied by ritual —
executions or sacrifices. All this indicates social stratification in the society. Cahokia, near —
East St. Louis, Illinois, covered 5 square miles and may have had more than 30,000 people
in and around its center. Its largest earthen pyramid, now called Monk’s Mound, covers
15 acres and is comparable in size to the largest pyramids of the classic period in Mexico.
Many of these cultural features seem to suggest contact with Mesoamerica.

8.1.1 The Aztec Rise to Power

The Toltec Empire lasted until about 1150, when it apparently was destroyed by nomadic
invaders from the north, who also seem to have sacked Tula about that time. The center
-of population and political power in Central Mexico shifted to the valley of Mexico and.
especially to the shores of the large chain of lakes in that basin. These provided a rich
aquatic environment. The shores of the lakes were dotted with settlements and towns
and supported a dense population. Of the approximately 3,000 square miles in the basin
of the valley, about 400 square miles were under water. The lakes became the cultural —
heartland and population center of Mexico in the postclassical period. In the unstable
world of post-Toltec Mesoamerica, various peoples and cities jockeyed for control of
the lakes. The winners of this struggle, the Aztecs—or, as they called themselves, the
Mexica—eventually built a great empire, but when they first emerged on the historical
scene, they were the most unlikely candidates for power.

The Aztec rise to power and formation of an imperial state was as spectacular as it
was rapid. According to some of their legends, the Mexica had once inhabited the central B


--- End of Page 4 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 191

valley and had known agriculture and the “civilized” life Map 8.1 CENTRAL MEX!

CO AND LAKE TEXCOCO

put had lived in exile to the north in a place called Aztlan
( ‘AZT-lahn) (from whence we get the name Aztec). This may
be an exaggeration by people who wanted to lay claim to
a distinguished heritage. Other sources indicate that the
Aztecs were simply one of the nomadic tribes that used the
political anarchy, after the fall of the Toltecs, to penetrate

the area of sedentary agricultural peoples. Like the ancient

|» Aztec city
‘| —— Aztec causeway

n

A re
|
o\ \ mexico { et

Area of map below NL
P pel a

we
PACIFIC OCEAN

We
a

Egyptians, the Aztecs rewrote history to suit their purposes.

What seems clear is that the Aztecs were a group of ay
900 peoplé who mi Res. g
about 10,000 people who migrated to the shores of Lake he a 9
Texcoco (Map 8.1) in the central valley of Mexico around Xalocen > Teotihuacdn, ©
1325. After the fall of the Toltec Empire, the central valley ahem
7 P spe : ~ &Chiccnautla
was inhabited by a mixture of peoples: Chichimec migrants % Tass

from the northwest and various groups of sedentary farm-
ers. In this period, the area around the lake was dominated
by several tribes or peoples organized into city-states. Much
like medieval Europe, this was a world of political maneu-
vers and state marriages, competing powers and shifting al-
Jiances. These political units claimed authority on the basis
of their military power and their connections to Toltec cul-
ture. Many of these peoples spoke Nahuatl (NAH-wahtl),
the language the Toltecs had spoken. The Aztecs also spoke

“pscap aloo, Oa? |
ST idoopan, +:

aie

ul

Itepect

this language, a fact that made their rise to power and their fo Lake 5 :
A , gh ¢ Xechimilco » Chalco pti
eventual claims to legitimacy more acceptable. AS, PO Pa E
An intrusive and militant group, the Aztecs were dis- ee? ergs es Chaled “Yo
trusted and disliked by the dominant powers of the area, ALL Sy ie ‘ ey
‘but their fighting skills could be put to use, and this made D €  DRLOMETERS «2+

fepeyacac Lake

Tlatelolco

enochtitlan -
‘de "
: Le
NE B

Culhuzedn 5

«Coatlinchan

Texcoco

hirnalhaued
Atenco ae

’.

= a
.
Lake pe

them attractive as mercenaries or allies. For about a century
the Aztecs wandered around the shores of the lake, being

This aquatic environment was the heart of the Aztec Empire.

allowed to settle for a while and then being driven out by
more powerful neighbors.

Ina period of warfare, the Aztecs had a reputation as tough warriors and fanatical
followers of their gods, to whom they offered human sacrifices. This reputation made
them both valued and feared. Their own legends held that their wanderings would end
when they saw an eagle perched on a cactus with a serpent in its beak. Supposedly, this
sign was seen on a marshy island in Lake Texcoco, and there, on that island and one
nearby, the Mexica settled. The city of Tenochtitlan was founded about 1325.

_. From this secure base the Aztecs began to take a more active role in regional politics.
“Serving as mercenaries and then as allies brought prosperity to the Aztecs, especially to
theirruler and the warrior nobles, who took lands aid tribute from conquered towns. By
1428, the Aztecs had emerged as an independent power. In 1434, Tenochtitlan created an
alliance with two other city-states that controlled much of the central plateau. In reality,
Tenochtitlan and the Aztecs dominated their allies and controlled the major share of the
_ uibute and lands taken.

8.1.2 The Aztec Social Contract

Aztec domination extended from the Tarascan frontier about 100 miles north of
Present-day Mexico City southward to the Maya area. Subject peoples were forced to pay
tibute, surrender lands, and sometimes do military service for the growing Aztec Empire.

Aztec society had changed in the process of expansion and conquest. From a loose
8sOciation of clans, the Mexica had become a stratified society under the authority of a

Tenochtitlan
[teh-nahk-teet-LAHN] Founded
¢, 1325 on marshy island in Lake
Texcoco; became center of Aztec
power; joined with Tlacopan and
Texcoco in 1434 to form a triple
alliance that controlled most of
central plateau of Mesoamerica.

--- End of Page 5 ---
192 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Tlaloc

[tlah-LOHK] Major god of Aztecs;
associated with fertility and the
agricultural cycle; god of rain.

Huitzilopochtli
[WEE-tsuh-loh-POHKT-lee] Aztec
tribal patron god; central figure
of cult of human sacrifice and
warfare; identified with old

sun god. :

supreme ruler. The histories were rewritten, and the Mexica were described as a People .
chosen to serve the gods. Human sacrifice, long a part of Mesoamerican religion, Steatly é'}
expanded into an enormous cult in which the military class played a central role as sup.
pliers of war captives to be used as sacrificial victims. A few territories were left uncon. _
quered so that periodic “flower wars” could be staged in which both sides could obtain
captives for sacrifice. Whatever the religious motivations of this cult, the Aztec rulerg
manipulated those motivations as an effective means of political terror. By the time of _
Moctezuma II, (1502-1520) the Aztec state was dominated by a king who representeg _
civil power and served as a representative of the gods on earth. The cult of human sacri.
fice and conquest was united with the political power of the ruler and the nobility. ;

8.2 Aztec Religious and Economic
Structure

What were the main characteristics of Aztec society?

The Aztecs utilized many of the cultural and economic features they inherited from ear-: ;
lier societies in the region. But they added important new elements, including a more :
militaristic cultural tone and, in agriculture, a variety of new techniques. Aztec achieve-
ments were ail the more remarkable as they continued to work within an essentially —
Neolithic technological framework.

8.2.1 Religion and the Ideology of Conquest

Aztec religion incorporated many features that had long been part of the Mesoameri-
can belief system. Religion was a vast, uniting, and sometimes oppressive force in which —
little distinction was made between the world of the gods and the natural world. The
traditional deities of Mesoamerica—the gods of rain, fire, water, corn, the sky, and the }
sun, many of whom had been worshiped as far back as the time of Teotihuacan—were —
venerated among the Aztecs. There were at least 128 major deities, but there seemed to _
be many more: As in popular Hinduism, each deity had a male and female form, because
a basic duality was recognized in all things. Moreover, gods might have different man. _
ifestations, somewhat like the avatars of the Hindu deities. Each god had at least five |
aspects, each associated with one of the cardinal directions and the center. Certain gods —
were thought to be the patrons of specific cities, ethnic groups, or occupations.

The gods were supported by a round of yearly festivals and ceremonies that in-
volved feasting and dancing along with penance and sacrifice. This complex array of ~
deities can be organized into three major themes or cults. The first were the gods of fer-
tility and the agricultural cycle, such as Tlaloc, the god of rain (called Chac by the Maya)
and the gods and goddesses of water, maize, and fertility. A second group centered on ~
the creator deities, the great gods and goddesses who had brought the universe into be-
ing. The story of their actions played a central role in Aztec cosmography. Much Aztec
abstract and philosophical thought was devoted to the theme of creation. Finally, the cult”
of warfare and sacrifice built on the preexisting Mesoamerican traditions that had been.
expanding since Toltec times and, under the militaristic Aztec state, became the cult of :
the state. Huitzilopochtli, the Aztec tribal patron, became the central figure of this cult.

The Aztecs revered the great traditional deities—such as Tlaloc and Quetzalcoatl, an at
cient god of civilization—that were so holy to the Toltecs; but their own tribal deity, Huitzilo
pochtli, was paramount. The Aztecs identified him with the old sun god, and they saw him
as a warrior in the daytime sky fighting to give life and warmth to the world against the a
forces of the night. To carry out that struggle, the sun needed strength, and just as the gods
had sacrificed themselves for humankind, the nourishment the gods needed most was that

Hun
exp;
thei,

—
Phot

--- End of Page 6 ---
which was most precious: human life in the form of hearts and blood. The great temple of
qenochtitlan was ‘dedicated to both Huitzilopochtli and Tlaloc. The tribal deity of the Aztecs
and the ancient agricultural god of the sedentary peoples of Mesoamerica were thus united.

In fact, although human sacrifice had long been a part of Mesoamerican religion, it
expanded considerably in the postclassical period of militarism. Warrior cults and the

militaristic images of jaguars and eagles devouring human hearts were characteristic
of Toltec art. The Aztecs simply took an existing tendency and carried it further. Both
the types and frequency of sacrifice increased, and a whole symbolism and ritual, which
included cannibalism, developed as part of the cult (Figure 8.3). How much of Aztec
sacrifice was the result of religious conviction and how much was a tactic of terror and
political control by the rulers and priests is still open to debate.

Beneath the surface of this polytheism, there was also a sense of spiritual unity.
Nezhualcoyotl, the king of Texcoco, wrote hymns to the “lord of the close vicinity,” an
invisible creative force that supported all the gods. Yet his conception of a kind of mono-
theism, much like that of Pharaoh Akhenaton in Egypt, appears to have been too abstract
and never gained great popularity.

Although the bloody aspects of Aztec religion have gained much attention, we must
also realize that the Aztecs concerned themselves with many of the same great religious
and spiritual questions that have preoccupied other civilizations: Is there life after death?
What is the meaning of life? What does it mean to live a good life? Do the gods really exist?

Nezhualcoyotl, whose poetry survived in oral form and was written down in the
sixteenth century, wondered about life after death:

Do flowers go to the land of the dead?

In the Beyond, are we dead or do we still live?
Where is the source of light, since that which gives life hides itself?

Figure 8.3

Human s Sacrifice was practiced by many Mesoamerican peoples, but the Aztecs apparently
fe owed its practice for political and religious reasons. This i image shows Aztec priests cutting out
eit victims’ hearts and then rolling the bodies down the steps of the pyramid.

PI
hoto. Researchers/Science History images/Alamy Stock Photo

Chapter 8: The Americas 193

Nezhualcoyotl
{nehz-uh-WAHL-koh-YOH-
tihl] Leading Aztec king of the
fifteenth century.

--- End of Page 7 ---
194 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 8.4

This Aztec stone calendar is about 12 feet across and 4 feet thick, and it weighs particular points in the calendar cycle (Figure 8.4).
about 24 tons. it was unearthed accidentally by construction crews in Mexico Moreover, the Aztecs also believed in a cyclical =

City in 1790.

As in the Vedas of ancient India, he also won.
dered about the existence of the gods:

Are you real, are you fixed?

Only You dominate all things
The Giver of Life.

Is this true?

Perhaps, as they say, it is not true.

Aztec religious art and poetry are filled with —
images of flowers, birds, and song, all of which
the Aztecs greatly admired, as well as human §
hearts and blood, the “precious water” needed to
sustain the gods. This mixture of images makes _
the’symbolism of Aztec religion difficult for mod-
ern observers to appreciate. :

Aztec religion depended on a complex my- ~
thology that explained the birth and history of
the gods and their relationship to peoples, and’
on a religious symbolism that infused all aspects —
of life. The Mesoamerican calendar system was
religious, and many ceremonies coincided with 7]

view of history, and that the world had-been de-

jejim/Shutterstock

chinampas

Beds of aquatic weeds, mud, and
earth placed in frames made

of cane and rooted in lakes to
create “floating islands”; system
of irrigated agriculture utilized
by Aztecs.

stroyed four times before and would be destroyed |
again. Thus, there was a certain fatalism in Aztec thought and a premonition that even-_
tually the sacrifices would be insufficient, and the gods would again bring catastrophe. |

8.2.2 Feeding the People: The Economy of the Empire

Feeding the great population of Tenochtitlan and the Aztec confederation in general de- |
pended on traditional forms of agriculture and on innovations developed by the Aztecs.
Lands of conquered peoples often were appropriated, and food sometimes was de- =
manded as tribute. In and around the lake, however, the Aztecs adopted an ingenious
system of irrigated agriculture by building chinampas. These were beds of aquatic”
weeds, mud, and earth that had been placed in frames made of cane and rooted to the.
lake floor. They formed artificial floating islands about 17 feet long and 100 to 330 feets
wide. This narrow construction allowed the water to reach all the plants, and willow
trees were also planted at intervals to give shade and help fix the roots. Much of the land
of Tenochtitlan itself was chinampa in origin, and in the southern end of the lake, more ;
than 20,000 acres of chinampas were constructed. The yield from chinampa agriculture
was high: Four cofn crops a year were possible. Apparently, this system of irrigated age
riculture had been used in preclassical days, but a rise in the level of the lakes had made
it impossible to continue. After 1200, however, lowering water levels once again stimu- |
lated chinampa construction, which the Aztecs carried out ona grand scale. Not only the 7
Aztecs, but all the peoples of Central and Northern Mexico realized that control of wate!
was the key to survival and ecological success. ;
Production by the Aztec peasantry and tribute provided the basic foods. In each
Aztec community, the local clan apportioned the lands, some of which were also set aside 7
for support of the temples and the state. In addition, individual nobles might have pie
vate estates, which were worked by servants or slaves from conquered peoples. Each-
community had periodic markets—according 'to various cycles in the calendar sys |
tem, such as every 5 and 13 days—in which a wide variety of goods were exchanged.

--- End of Page 8 ---
Cacao beans and gold dust sometimes were used as currency, but much trade was done
as barter. The great market at Tlatelolco (TLAT-ehl-UHL-koh) operated daily and was
controlled by the special merchant class, or pochteca, which specialized in long-distance
trade in luxury items such as plumes of tropical birds and cacao, The markets were highly
regulated and under the control of inspectors and special judges. Despite the importance
of the markets, this was not a market economy as we usually understand it.

The state controlled the use and distribution of many commodities and redistributed
the vast amounts of tribute received from subordinate peoples. Tribute levels were as-
signed according to whether the subject peoples had accepted Aztec rule or had fought
against it. Those who surrendered paid less. Tribute payments, such as food, slaves, and
sacrificial victims, served political and economic ends. More than 120,000 mantles of cot-
ton cloth alone were collected as tribute each year and sent to Tenochtitlan. The Aztec
state redistributed these goods. After the original conquests, it rewarded its nobility
richly, and the commoners received far less.

8.3 Aztec Society in Transition

What were the principal strengths and constraints of the Aztec economy and social
structure?

As with all civilizations, Aztec society experienced changes over time. The Mexica were
one of a number of peoples who spoke the Nahuatl language and occupied the region of
central Mexico. From their humble origins as hunters and gatherers they emerged as a
dominant power, and their rise created opportunities for some groups and a loss of status
for others within their society. Eventually, they held sway over the 50 or so political units
of the central valley of Mexico. Expansion by warfare privileged the warriors, and the re-
ligious basis for expansion made the priests and the cults of the temples a force in society.
No ruler could govern without the support of these sectors of society, a support obtained
and preserved by giving out rewards and benefits. But such policies transformed the
nature of Aztec society. :

Aztec society became more hierarchical as the empire grew and social classes with
different functions developed, although the older organization based on clans and kin-
ship groups never disappeared. Tribute was drawn from subject peoples, but Aztec
society confronted technological barriers that made it difficult to maintain the large pop-
ulation of central Mexico.

83.1 A Widening Social Gulf

During their wanderings, the Aztecs had been divided into seven calpulli, or clans, a
form of organization that they later expanded and adapted to their imperial position.
The calpulli were no longer only kinship groups but also residential groupings, which
might include neighbors, allies, and dependents. Much of Aztec local life was based on
the calpulli, which performed important functions such as distributing land to heads of
households, organizing labor gangs and military units in times of war, and maintaining a
temple and school. Calpulli were governed by councils of family heads, but not all fami-
lies were equal, nor were all calpulli of equal status.

The calpulli obviously had been the ancient and basic building block of Aztec society.
Inthe origins of Aztec society every person, noble and commoner, had belonged to a cal-
Pulli but as Aztec power increased, the calpulli had been transformed, and other forms
Of social stratification had emerged. As the empire expanded, a class of nobility emerged,
based on certain privileged families in the most distinguished calpulli. Originating
from the lineages that headed calpulli and from marriages, military achievements, or
Service to the state, this group of nobles accumulated high offices, private lands, and

Chapter 8: The Americas 195

pochteca

Special merchant class in Aztec
society; specialized in long-
distance trade in luxury items.

calpulli

[kal-PUHL-lee] Clans in Aztec
society, later expanded to
include residential groups that
distributed land and provided
labor and warriors.

--- End of Page 9 ---
196 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

other advantages. The most prominent families ; in
the calpulli, those who had dominated leadership
roles and formed a kind of local nobility, eventy.
ally were overshadowed by the military and ag.
ministrative nobility of the Aztec state.

Although some commoners might be pro.
moted ‘to noble status, most nobles were born into
the class. Nobles controlled the priesthood and the
military leadership. In fact, the military was orga.
nized into various ranks based on experience and_
success in taking captives (Figure 8.5). Military vir.
tues were linked to the cult of sacrifice and infused.
the whole society; they became the justification for
the nobility’ s status. The “flowery death,” or death
while taking prisoners for the sacrificial knife, was
the fitting end to a nobie life and ensured eternity
in the highest heaven—a reward also promised
to women who died in childbirth. The military
was highly ritualized. There were orders of war-
riors: The Jaguar and Eagle “Knights” and other

Figure 8.5

other insignia marked off the military ranks.
The social gulf that separated the nobility, or
pipiltin, from the commoners was widening as the —
empire grew. Egalitarian principles that may have —
existed in Aztec life disappeared, as happened
among the warring Germanic tribes of early me-
dieval Europe. Social distinctions were made ap-
parent by the use of and restrictions on clothing, |
hairstyles, uniforms, and other symbols of rank.
The imperial family became the most distin:
guished of the pipiltin families.
As the nobility broke free from their old calpulli
In the militarized society of the Aztec Empire, warriors were organized into and acquired private lands, a new class of workers
regiments and groups distinguished by their uniforms. They gained rank and almost like serfs was created to serve as labo vers
respect by capturing enemies for sacrifice. Note the symbolic gripping of the . j
defeated captives’ hair as a sign of military success. on these lands. Unlike the noaniaaiaieid attached iy
“The Hislbiy ColSGnT/Aleiny Sek Phais the land-controlling calpulli, these workers did not
- control land, and they worked at the will of others.
Their status was low, but it was still above that of the slaves, who might have been wat
captives, criminals, or people who had sold themselves into bondage to escape hunge!: |

Finally, there were other social groups. The scribes, artisans, and healers all were part of
an intermediate group that was especially important in the larger cities. The long-distance ;
merchants formed a sort of calpulli with their own patron gods, privileges, and internal”
divisions. They sometimes served as spies or agents for the Aztec military, but they were
subject to restrictions that hindered their entry into or rivalry with the nobility.
It is possible to see an emerging conflict between the nobility and the commone!$
and to interpret this as a class struggle, but some specialists emphasize that to interpret
Aztec society on that basis is to impose Western concepts on a different reality. Corporal? |
~ bodies such as the calpulli, temple maintenance associations, and occupational group®

cut across class and remained important in Aztec life. Competition between corporat
groups often was more apparent—and more violent—than competition between social

classes.

--- End of Page 10 ---
went into preparing the basic food. .

and control such vast numbers of people.

Chapter 8: The Americas . 197

3.3.2’ Overcoming Technological Constraints

Membership in society was thus defined by participation in various wider groups, such
ag the calpulli or a specific social class. It was also defined by gender roles. Aztec women
assumed a variety of roles. Peasant women helped in the fields, but their primary do-
main was the household, where child-rearing and cooking took up much time. Above
all, weaving skill was highly regarded. The responsibility for training young girls fell to
the older women. Marriages often were arranged between lineages, and virginity at mar-
riage was highly regarded for young women. Polygamy existed among the nobility, but
the peasants were monogamous. Aztec women could inherit property and pass it to their
heirs. The rights of Aztec women seem to have been fully recognized, but in political and
social life their role, although complementary to that of men, remained subordinate.

The technology of the Americas limited social development in a variety of ways.
Here we can see a significant difference between the lives of women in Mesoamerica
and in the Mediterranean world. In the maize-based economies of Mesoamerica, women
ent six hours a day grinding corn by hand on stone boards, or metates, to prepare the
household’s food. Although similar hand techniques were used in ancient Egypt, they
were eventually replaced by animal- or water-powered mills that turned wheat into
flour. The miller or baker of Rome or medieval Europe could do the work of hundreds of
women. Maize was among the simplest and most productive cereals to grow but among
the most time-consuming to prepare. Without the wheel or suitable animals for power,
the Indian civilizations were unable to free women from the 30 to 40 hours a week that

Finally, we must consider the size of the population of the Aztec state. Estimates
have varied widely, from as little as 1.5 million to more than 25 million, but there is con-
siderable evidence that population density was high, resulting in a total population that
was far greater than previously suspected. Some historical demographers estimate that
the population of Central Mexico under Aztec control reached over 20 million, excluding
the Maya areas. This underlines the extraordinary ability of the Aztec state to intimidate

Document
Aztec Women and Men

In the mid-sixteenth century, bernardino de sahagun, a
Spanish missionary, prepared an extraordinary encyclopedia
of Aztec culture. His purpose was to gather this information
to learn the customs and beliefs of the Indians and their
language in order to better convert them. Although Sahagutin
hated the Indian religion, he came to admire many aspects
of their culture. His Florentine Codex: The General History of
ihe Things of New Spain is one of the first ethnographies and
a remarkable compendium of Aztec culture. Sahaguin used
many indian informants to tell him about the days before the
European arrival, and even though this work dates from the
Postconquest era, it contains much useful information about

oret
vale earlier Aztec life.
aps In the following excerpts, the proper behavior for people

in different roles in Aztec society are described by the Aztecs
themselves.

Father

One's father is the source of lineage. He is the sincere
one. One’s father is diligent, solicitous, compassionate,
sympathetic, a careful administrator of his household. He
rears, he teaches others, he advises, he admonishes one. He
is exemplary; he leads a model life. He stores up for himself;
he stores up for others. He cares for his assets; he saves for
others. He is thrifty; he saves for the future, teaches thrift. He
regulates, distributes with care, establishes order.

“The bad father is incompassionate, negligent, unreliable.
He is unfeeling... a shirker, a loafer, a sullen worker.

Mother

One’s mother has children; she suckles them. Sincere,
vigilant, agile, she is an energetic worker—diligent, watchful,

--- End of Page 11 ---
198 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

solicitous, full of anxiety. She teaches people; she is attentive
to them. She caresses, she serves others; she is apprehensive
for their welfare; she is careful, thrifty—constantly at work.
The bad mother is evil, dull, stupid, sleepy, lazy. She is a
squanderer, a petty thief, a deceiver, a fraud. Unreliable, she is one
who loses things through neglect or anger, who heeds no one.
She is disrespectful, inconsiderate, disregarding, careless. She
shows the way to disobedience; she expounds nonconformity.

The Rulers

The ruler is a shelter—fierce, revered, famous, esteemed, well~
reputed, renowned.

The good ruler is a protector: one who carries his subjects
in his arms, who unites them, who brings them togéther. He
rules, he takes responsibilities, assumes burdens. He carries his
subjects in his cape; he bears them in his arms. He governs; he
is obeyed. To him as a shelter, as refuge, there is recourse...

The bad ruler is a wild beast, a demon of the air, an
ocelot, a wolf—infamous, avoided, detested as a respecter of
nothing. He terrifies with his gaze; he makes the earth rumble;
he implants; he spreads fear. He is wished dead.

The Noble

The noble has a mother, a father. He resembles his parents.
The good nobie is obedient, cooperative, a follower of his
parents’ ways, a discreet worker; attentive, willing. He follows
the ways of his parents; he resembles his father; he becomes
his father’s successor; he assumes his lot.

One of noble lineage is a follower of the exemplary life,
a taker of the good example of others, a seeker, a follower of
the exemplary life. He speaks eloquently; he is soft-spoken,
virtuous, deserving of gratitude. He is noble of heart, gentle
of word, discreet, well-reared, well-iaught. He is moderate,
energetic, inquiring, inquisitive. He scratches the earth with a
thorn. He is one who fasts, who starves his entrails, who parches
his lips. He provides nourishment to others. He sustains one, he
serves food, he provides comfort. He is a concealer [of himself],
a belittler of himself. He magnifies and praises others. He is a
mourner for the dead, a doer of penances, a gracious speaker,
devout, godly, desirable, wanted, memorable.

The bad noble is ungrateful and forgetful, a debaser,
a disparager of things, contemptuous of others, arrogant,
bragging. He creates disorder, glories over his lineage, extols
his own virtues.

The Mature Common Woman

The good mature woman is candid. She is resolute, firm

of heart, constant—not to be dismayed; brave like a man. _

vigorous,. resolute, Persevering—not one to falter. She is

long-suffering; she accepts reprimands calmly—endures _

things like a man. She becomes firm—takes courage. She ig

intent. She gives of herself. She goes in humility. She exerts

herself.

The bad woman is thin, tottering, weak—an inconstant*

companion, unfriendly. She annoys others, chagrins them, shames,
oppresses one. She becomes impatient; she loses hope, becomes
embarrassed —chagrined. Evil is her life; she lives in shame.

The Weaver of Designs

“She concerns herself with using thread, works with thread,
The good weaver of designs is skilled—a maker of varicolored
capes, an outliner of designs, a blender of colors, a joiner of
pieces, a matcher of pieces, a person of good memory.. She
does things dexterously. She weaves designs. She selects,
She weaves tightly. She forms borders. She forms the neck....

The bad weaver of designs is untrained—silly, foolish,
unobservant, unskilled of hand, ignorant, stupid, She tangles
the thread, she harms her work—she spoils it.

The Physician

The physician is a knower of herbs, of roots, of trees, of
stones; she is experienced in these. She is one who conducts
examinations; she is a woman of experience, of trust, of
professional skill: a counselor.

The good physician is a restorer, a provider of health, a
relaxer—one who makes pedple feel well, who envelops one in
ashes. She cures people; she provides them health; she lances
them; she bleeds them... pierces them with an obsidian lancet.

SOURCE: Bernardino de Sahagun, “Florentine Codex: The General History of
the Things of New Spain”, trans. and ed. Arthur J. O. Anderson and Charles
Dibble (Santa Fe, NM; Salt Lake City: University of Utah: 1950-1982).

Review Questions:
1. In what ways do the expectations for men and women
differ in Aztec society?
2. To what extent do the roles for men and women in Aztec
society differ from our own?
3. Did the Aztecs value the same characteristics as our
own and other historical societies?

8.3.3 A Tribute Empire

Each city-state was ruled by a speaker chosen from the nobility. The Great Speaker, the
ruler of Tenochtitlan, was first among supposed equals. He was in effect the emperol
with great private wealth and public power, and was increasingly considered a living
god. His court was magnificent and surrounded with elaborate rituals. Those who ap’

proached him could not look him in the eye and were required to throw dirt upon theif


--- End of Page 12 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 199

2 yieads: as a sign-of humility. In theory he was. eletted, but his election was really a choice
petween siblings of the same royal family. The prime minister held a position of tremen-

firm dous power and usually was a close relative of the ruler. There was a governing council;
man, E in theory; the rulers of the other cities in the alliance also had a say in government, but in
‘ is 7] reality most power was in the hands of the Aztec ruler and his chief advisor.
hea During the century of greatest Aztec expansion after 1426, a social and political
i transformation had taken place. The position and nature of the old calpulli clans had
Xerts , changed radically, and a newly powerful nobility with a deified and nearly absolute ruler
3 had emerged. The ancient cult of military virtues had been elevated to a supreme posi-
os tion as the religion of the state, and the double purpose of securing tribute for the state
™ 3 and obtaining victims for Huitzilopochtli drove further Aztec conquests.
me The empire was never integrated, and local rulers often stayed in place to act as tribute

‘collectors for the Aztec overlords. In many ways the Aztec Empire was simply an expansion
of Jong-existing Mesoamerican concepts and institutions of government, and it was not un-
like the subject city-states over which it gained control. These city-states, in turn, wére often

ead, left unchanged if they recognized Aztec supremacy and met their obligations of labor and
ored Si tribute. Tribute payments served both an economic and a political function, concentrating
er of power and wealth in the Aztec capital. Archeologists at the recent excavations of the Great
She Temple beneath the center of Mexico City have been impresséd by the large number of of-
acts, ferings and objects that came from the farthest ends of the empire and beyond. At the fron-
Kees tiers, neighboring states such as that of the Tarascans of Michoacan in West Central Mexico
dish, preserved their freedom, while within the empire enclaves of independent kingdoms such
igles as Tlaxcala (tlaks-KAHL-uh) maintained a fierce opposition to the Aztecs. There were many

revolts against Aztec rule or a particular tribute burden, which

E thlessly.
the Aztecs often put down ruthlessly. ; Map 8.2 INCA EXPANSION
4 In general, the Aztec system was a success because it __ 7 _
3 of aimed at exerting political domination and not necessarily Sy ge py
; a 7 oon = ——_ — C= -——-f j
ucts direct administrative or territorial control. In the long run, 9 2 ~®™""
» of however, the increasing social stresses created by the rise of [inca Empire | pe .
the nobles and the system of terror and tribute imposed on To 1438 | a fez
ha subject peoples were internal weaknesses that contributed to aon ® wl eo eed
en = the Aztec empire's collapse. _— % a5a7 | SOUTH po car
(Ces ae The Aztecs were a continuation of the long process of civi- Ao
cel lization in Mesoamerica. The civilizations of the classic era did —— © a ~
tof not simply disappear in Central Mexico or among the Maya in
s = Yucatan and Central America, but they were reinterpreted and

adapted to new political and social realities. When Europeans
arrived in Mexico, they assumed that what they found was the H PACIFIC
culmination of Indian civilization, when-in fact it was the mil- |: OCEAN

tarized afterglow of earlier achievements. «20S = at

BC.

8.4 Twantinsuyu: World of =~ =_2"*
0 200 400 KILOMETERS

3 the Incas

F What were the Principal causes of the expansion of the |

q Taca Empire? Santiago,
he Almost at the same time that the Aztecs extended their con- | Ps} )
of, trol over much of Mesoamerica, another great imperial state wr atau OW dw
ng was using in the Andean highlands, and it eventually be- _ - 7
po Came an empire some 3,000 miles in extent (Map 8.2). The Each ruler expanded the empire in a series of campaigns to

increase wealth and political control.

ar Trea Empire incorporated many aspects of previous Andean


--- End of Page 13 ---
200 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

ayllus

[EYEL-lehs] Households

in Andean societies that
recognized some form of
kinship; traced descent from
some common, sometimes
mythical ancestor.

Pachacuti

{[PACH-uh-KOO-tee] Ruler of
Inca society from 1438 to 1471;
launched a series of military
campaigns that gave Incas
control of the region from Cuzco
to the shores of Lake Titicaca.

Twantinsuyu
[twahn-tihn-SOO-yoo] Word
for Inca Empire; region from
present-day Colombia to Chile
and eastward to northem
Argentina.

split inheritance

Inca practice of descent; all titles
and political power went to
successor, but wealth and land
remained in the hands of male
descendants for support of cult
of dead Inca’s mummy.

cultures but fused them together in new ways. With a genius for state organization and
bureaucratic control over peoples of different cultures and languages, it achieved a level 1
of integration and domination previously unknown in the Americas.

After about 1300 c.z., the Inca Empire emerged in the highlands of Peru and eventy. _
ally spread its control over the whole region by integrating many ethnic groups into an
extensive imperial state.

Throughout the Andean cultural hearth, after the breakup of the large “intermegj. _
ate horizon” states of Tiahuanaco and Huari (c. 550-1000 c.z.), several smaller regional’
states continued to exercise some power. Unlike the breakdown of power that took’
place in postclassical Mesoamerica, in the Andean zone many large states continued to
be important. Some states in the Andean highlands on the broad open areas near Lake

Titicaca and the states along rivers on the north coast, such as those in the Moche valley, the
remained centers of agricultural activity and population density. This was a period of re}
war between rival local chiefdoms and small states and in some ways was an Andean _ the

parallel to the post-Toltec militaristic era in Mesoamerica. Of these states, the coastal _
kingdom of Chimor, centered on its capital of Chan-Chan, emerged as the most power. _
ful. Between 900 and its conquest by the Incas in 1465, it gained control of most of the

north coast of Peru. :

8.4.1 The Inca Rise to Power

While Chimor spread its control over 600 miles of the coast, in the southern Andean _
highlands, where there were few large urban areas, ethnic groups and small states
struggled for survival. Among these groups were several related Quechua-speaking :
clans, or ayllus, living near Cuzco, an area that had been under the influence of Huari,
a powerful state, but had not been particularly important. Their own legends stated
that 10 related clans emerged from caves in the region and were taken to Cuzco bya
mythical leader. Wherever their origins, by about 1350 c.z. they lived in and around
Cuzco, and by 1438 they had defeated their hostile neighbors in the area. At this point —
under their ruler, or Inca, Pachacuti (r. 1438-1471), they launched a series of military
alliances and campaigns that brought them control of the whole area from Cuzco to the
shores of Lake Titicaca.
Over the next 60 years, Inca armies were constantly on the march, extending control
over a vast territory. Pachacuti’s son and successor, Topac Yupanqui (TOH-pak YUH-
pan-KEE), conquered the northern coastal kingdom of Chimor by seizing its irrigation
system, and he extended Inca control into the southern area of what is now Ecuador. Ats —
the other end of the empire, Inca armies reached the Maule River in Chile against stiff*
resistance from the Araucanian Indians. The next ruler, Huayna Capac (WEYE-nah kab- -
PAHK) (x. 1493-1527), consolidated these conquests and suppressed rebellions on the
frontiers. By the time of his death, the Inca Empire—or, as they called it, Twantinsuyu—-
stretched from what is now Colombia to Chile and eastward across Lake Titicaca and
Bolivia to northern Argentina. Between 9 million and 13 million people of different ethnic a
backgrounds and languages came under Inca rule, a remarkable feat, given the extent of
the empire and the technology available for transportation and communication. E

8.4.2 Conquest and Religion

What impelled the Inca conquest and expansion? The usual desire for economic gait
and political power that we have seen in other empires is one possible explanation,
but there may be others more in keeping with Inca culture and ideology. The cult of !
the ancestors was extremely important in Inca belief. Deceased rulers were mummified
and then treated as intermediaries with the gods, paraded in public during festivals,
offered food and gifts, and consulted on important matters by special oracles. From the
Chimor kingdom the Incas adopted the practice of royal split inheritance, whereby

--- End of Page 14 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 201

and
level

all the political power and titles of the ruler went to his successor but all his palaces,
wealth, land, and possessions remained in the hands of his male descendants, who
used them to support the cult of the dead Inca’s mummy for eternity. To ensure his

own cult and place for eternity, each new Inca needed to secure land and wealth, and
these normally came as part of new conquests. In effect, the greater the number of past
rulers, the greater the number of royal courts to support, and the greater the demand
for labor, lands, and tribute. This system created a self- -perpetuating need for expan-
sion, tied directly to ancestor worship and the cult of the royal mummies, as well as
tensions between the various royal lineages. The cult of the dead weighed heavily on

entu:
to an

nedi-
ional a
took

ed to the living.

Lake. Inca political and social life was infused with religious meaning. Like the Aztecs,
alley, the Incas held the sun to be the highest deity and considered the Inca to be the sun’s
od of representative on earth. The magnificent Temple of the Sun in Cuzco was the center of
dean — the state religion, and in its confines the mummies of the past Incas were kept. The cult
vastal of the sun was spread throughout the empire, but the Incas did not prohibit the worship

wer-
of the

of local gods.
Other deities were also worshiped as part of the state religion. Viracocha (vee-reh-

KOH-chuh), a creator god, was a favorite of Inca Pachacuti and rémained important.
Popular belief was based on a profound animism that endowed many natural phenom-
ena with spiritual power. Mountains, stones, rivers, caves, tombs, and temples were
considered huacas, or holy shrines. At these places, prayers were offered and animals,

dean — ves . ; : :
goods, and humans were sacrificed. In the Cuzco area, imaginary lines running from

itates:
aking
Tuari,
tated —
bya
ound =
point

litary

Visualizing the Past
Archeological Evidence of Political Practices

The inca system of split inheritance probably originated in the Review Questions:

: Chimu ki . Chi ing list 7 .
to the 5 imu “ingdom ens sts eee at ee sind 1. To what extent does such evidence indicate the
waters a Chan-Chan, ve enim mae a eves im composite nature of Inca culture?
rge walled . ist: i at eacl .
‘ ‘he 9 " 3 ee reneo nel = Tine’ iden 2. What are some of the possible problems of archeological
of these palatial compounds was a different king’s residence interpretation?

and that each became a mausoleum for his mummy upon F .
Y up 3. To what extent can material remains be used to explain

his death. or illustrate social phenomena?

Chan-Chan covered more than two square miles, It contained
Palace compounds, storehouses, residences, markets, and other City of Chan-Chan.

structures.
CRIS BOURONCLE/AFP/Getty Images

J Marshall - Tribaleye Images/Alamy Stock Photo


--- End of Page 15 ---
202 Part Ii: The Mongol Age, t200-1450

tambos

Way stations used by Incas as
inns and storehouses; supply
centers for Inca armies on the
move; relay points for system of
runners used to carry messages.

mita

Labor extracted for lands assigned
to the state and the religion; all
communities were expected to
contribute; an essential aspect of
Inca imperial control.

Inca socialism

A view created by Spanish
authors to describe Inca society
as a type of utopia; image of
the Inca Empire as a carefully
organized system in which
every community collectively
contributed to the whole.

the Temple of the Sun organized the huacas into groups for which certain ayllus took
responsibility. The temples were served by many priests and women dedicated to pra.
paring cloth and food for sacrifice. The temple priests were responsible mainly for the
great festivals and celebrations and for the divinations on which state actions often
depended.

8.4.3 The Techniques of Inca Imperial Rule

The Inca were able to control their vast empire by using techniques and practices
that ensured cooperation or subordination. The empire was ruled by the Inca, who
was considered almost a god. He ruled from his court at Cuzco, which was also the
site of the major temple; the high priest usually was a close relative. Twantinsuyy

~-was divided into four great provinces, each under a governor, and then divided

again. The Incas developed a state bureaucracy i in which almost all nobles played
a role. Although some chroniclers spoké of a state organization based on decimal
units of 10,000, 1000, 100, and smaller numbers of households to mobilize taxes and
Jabor, recent research reveals that many local practices and variations were allowed

to continue under Inca rule. Local rulers, or curacas, were allowed to maintain their.

positions and were given privileges by the Inca in return for their loyalty. The cu-
racas were exempt from tribute obligations and usually received labor or produce

from those under their control. For insurance, the sons of conquered chieftains were

taken to Cuzco for their education.
The Incas intentionally spread the Quechua (KEHCH-

Map 8.3 THE ANCIENT CITIES OF PERU

uh-wah) language as a means of integrating the empire. The

|
(%-— = Equator——-—= =~

i |

Tumbes

50° a

PACIFIC
OCEAN

v0 200 400 MILES

1 0 200 400KILOMETERS

e SOUTH ocd

Incas moved a conquered population to anew home. Through-

system of runners who carried messages throughout the em-
pire. The Inca probably maintained more than 10,000 tambos.

populations. Conquered peoples were enlisted in the Inca
armies under Inca officers and were rewarded with goods from
new conquests. Subject peoples received access to goods not
previously available to them, and the Inca state undertook large
building and irrigation projects that formerly would have been

The state claimed all resources and redistributed them. The In-

for the state, and lands for the sun—that is, for religion and the
support of priests. Also, some nobles held private estates.

ae demand tribute in kind but rather exacted labor on the lands
‘assigned to the state and the religion. Communities were &

The Inca system of roads, with its series of tambos, linked major
towns and cities and allowed rapid conimunication and troop
movement.

pected to take turns working on state and church lands and
sometimes on building projects or in mining. These’ labor
turns, or mita, were an essential aspect of Inca control. In ad-
dition, the Inca required women to weave high-quality cloth

Incas also made extensive use of colonists. Sometimes Quec- |
hua speakers from Cuzco were settled in a newly won area to, |
provide an example and a garrison. On other occasions, the ~

out the empire, a complex system of roads was built, with —
bridges and causeways when needed (Map 8.3). Along these 7
roads, way stations, or tambos, were placed about a day’s walk

apart to serve as inns, storehouses, and supply centers for Inca —
armies on the move. Tambos also served as relay points for the —

The Inca Empire extracted land and labor from subject —

impossible. In return, the Incas demanded loyalty and tribute.

cas divided conquered areas into lands for the people, lands :

With few exceptions the Incas, unlike the Aztecs, did not

for t
nold
and

were
Inca
appl


--- End of Page 16 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 203

for the court and for religious purposes. The Incas provided the wool, but each house-
hold was required to produce cloth. Woven cloth, a great Andean art form, had political
and religious significance. Some women were taken as concubines for the Inca; others
were selected as servants at the temples, the so-called Virgins of the Sun. In all this, the
Inca had an overall imperial system but remained sensitive to local variations, so that its
application accommodated regional and ethnic differences.

Thinking Historically

The “Troubling” Civilizations of the Americas

From the first encounter with the peoples of the Americas,
European concepts and judgments about civilization,
barbarism, morality, power, politics, and justice were constantly
called into question. The American Indian societies had many
religious ideas and practices that shocked Christian observers,
and aspects of their social and familial arrangements clashed
with European sensibilities. Those sensibilities often were
influenced by religious and political considerations. Many of
those who most condemned human sacrifice, polygamy, or
the despotism of Indian ruters were also those who tried to
justify European conquest and control, mass violence, and
theft on a continental scale. Other European voices also were
heard. Not long after the Spanish conquests in the sixteenth
century, defenders of Indian rights came forward to argue that
despite certain “unfortunate” habits, Indian civilization was
no less to be admired than that of the ancient (and pagan)
Romans and Greeks.

For Western civilization, evaluating and judging non-
Western or past societies has always been a complex
business that has mixed elements of morality, politics, religion,
and self-perception along with the record of what is observed
or considered to be reality. That complexity is probably just
as true for Chinese culture, Persian culture, or any culture
trying to understand another. Still, Western society seems to
have been particularly troubled by the American civilizations,
with their peculiar combination of Neolithic technology and
imperial organization. At times this has led to abhorrence and
rejection—as of Aztec sacrifice—but at other times it has led to
a kind of utopian romanticism in which the accomplishments
of the Indian past are used as a critique of the present and a”
Political program for the future.

The existence of Inca socialism is a case in point. Some
early Spanish authors portrayed Inca rule as despotic, but
others saw it as a kind of utopia. Shortly after the conquest
of Peru, Garcilaso de la Vega, the son of a Spaniard and an
Indian noblewoman, wrote a glowing history of his mother’s
People in which he presented an image of the Inca Empire
as a carefully organized system in which every community
Contributed to the whole, and the state regulated the
distribution of resources on the basis of need and reciprocity.
There was some truth in this view, but it ignored same aspects

of exploitation as well. In the twentieth century, Peruvian
socialists, faced with underdevelopment and social inequality
in their country, used this utopian view of Inca society as a
possible model for their own future. Their interpretation and
that of historians who later wrote of Inca socialism tended to
ignore the hierarchy in the Inca Empire and the fact that the
state extracted labor and goods from the subject communities
to support the nobles, who held extensive power. The utopian
view of the Incas was no less political than the despotic view.
Perhaps the lesson here is that what we. see in the past often
depends on what we think about the present or what we want
for the future.

But if Inca socialism and despotism have fascinated
students of the past, Aztec religion has caught the imagination
of historians and the general public. It causes us to ask how
a civilization as advanced as this could engage in a practice
so cruel and, to us, so morally reprehensible. Perhaps nothing
challenges our appreciation of the American civilizations
more than the extensive evidence of ritual torture and human
sacrifice, which reached staggering proportions under Aztec
rule. On some occasions thousands of people were slain,
usually by having their hearts ripped out.

First, we must put these practices in perspective. Cruelty
and violence: can be found in many cultures, and to a world
that has seen genocide, mass killings, and atomic warfare, the
Aztec practices are not so different from what our own age has
seen. Gertain customs in many past civilizations and present
cultures seem to us strange, cruel, and immoral. We find Aztec
human sacrifice particularly abhorrent, but such practices
also were found among the ancient Canaanites and the
Celtic peoples, and the Old Testament’story of Abraham and
Isaac, although its message is against such sacrifice, reflects
a practice known in the ancient Near East. Human sacrifice
was practiced in pre-Christian Scandinavia and ancient India.
Although by the time of Confucius human sacrifice of wives
and retainers at the burial of a ruler was no longer practiced
in China, the custom had been known. Sati, the Hindu ritual
suicide of the widow on the funeral pyre of her husband,
existed in India in the nineteenth century, although admittedly it
may have been exaggerated by the British colonial authorities.
The Aztecs certainly were not alone in taking human life as


--- End of Page 17 ---
204 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

a religious rite, Whatever our moral judgments about such

which lacked cattle and sheep, that transformation Never took {

customs, it remains the historian’s responsibility to understand place. Harris called the Aztec empire a “cannibal kingdom»
them in the context of their own culture and time. Other scholars have strongly objected to Harris’s interpretation e sm
How have historians tried to explain or understand Aztec of the evidence, which gave little attention to the ritual aspects the!
human sacrifice? Some defenders of Aztec culture have seen it of these acts. Still, human sacrifice shades all assessments of state
as a limited phenomenon, greatly exaggerated by the Spanish Aztec civilization. get
for political purposes. Many scholars ; These debates ultimately raj
have seen it as a religious act central Perhaps nothing challenges important questions about the 7 an
to the Aztec belief that humans must our appreciation of the of moral judgments in historica, a
sacrifice that which was most precious to American civilizations more analysis and the way in which oy Hae
them—life—to receive the sun, rain, and © than the extensive evidence sion of the past is influenced py 4 |
other. blessings of the gods. that make of ritual torture and human our own political, moral, ethical, and ofp
life possible. Others have viewed Aztec sacrifice. social programs. We cannot and and
Practice as the intentional manipulation perhaps should not abandon those fort
and expansion of a widespread phenomenon that had long -Programs, but we must always try to understand other times
existed among many American peoples. In other words, the and other peoples in their own terms. and
Aztec rulers, priests, and nobility used the cult of war and . sitio
large-scale human sacrifice for political purposes, to terrorize Review Questions: fis.
their neighbors and subdue the lower classes. Another 1. What special features of Aztec civilization must be stat
possible explanation is demographic. If Central Mexico was as explained? The
densely populated as we believe, then the sacrifices may have 2. Are they really distinctive? they
been a kind of population control. 3. What explanations are most persuasive in terms of larg
Other interpretations have been even more startling. historical sensitivity and contemporary standards? oreje
Anthropologist Marvin Harris has suggested that Aztec 4. What features of twenty-first-century society are similar Emy
sacrifice, accompanied by ritual cannibalism, was a response to those of Aztec civilization in that they will later need to ica,
to a lack of protein. He argued that in the Old World, human be explained? emp
sacrifice was replaced by animal sacrifice, but in Mesoamerica, tion
of tl
brot

In theory, each community aimed at self-sufficiency and depended on the state _

for goods it could not acquire easily. The ayllus of each community controlled the

land, and the vast majority of the men were peasants and herders. Women worked in of
the fields, wove cloth, and cared for the household (Figure 8.6). Roles and obligations — of s
were gender-specific and, at least in theory, equal.and interdependent. Andean peo- sub;
ples recognized parallel descent, so that property rights within the ayllus and among _ ipl

the nobility passed in both the male and female lines. Women passed rights and prop-
erty to daughters, men to sons. Whether in pre-Inca times women may have served —
as leaders of ayllus is open to question, but under the Incas this seems to have been
uncommon. The Inca emphasis on military virtues reinforced the inequality of men
and women.

The concept of close cooperation between men and women was also reflected in the ;
Inca view of the cosmos. Gods and goddesses were worshiped by men and women, but —
women felt a particular affinity for the moon and the goddesses of the earth and corn:
the fertility deities. The Inca queen, the Inca’s senior wife (usually also a sister of the _
Inca), was seen as a link to the moon. Queen and sister of the sun, she represented int —
perial authority to all women. But despite an ideology of gender equality, Inca practice —
created a gender hierarchy that paralleled the dominance of the Inca state over subject —
peoples. This fact is supported, and the power of the empire over local ethnic groups is —
demonstrated, by the Incas’ ability to select the most beautiful young women to serve the
temples or be given to the Inca.

The integration of imperial policy with regional and ethnic diversity was a political _
achievement. Ethnic headmen were left in place, but over them were administratog z


--- End of Page 18 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 205

drawn from the Inca nobility in Cuzco. Reciprocity and hi-
erarchy continued to characterize Andean groups as they
came under Inca rule; reciprocity between the state and
the local community was simply an added level. The Inca
state could provide roads, irrigation projects, and hard-to-
a goods. For example, maize usually was grown on irri-
gated land and was particularly important as a ritual crop.
state-sponsored irrigation added to its cultivation. The
Inca state manipulated the idea of reciprocity to extract Ta-
bor power, and it dealt harshly with resistance and revolt.
In addition to the ayllu peasantry, there was also a class
of-people, the yanas, who were removed from their ayllus
and served permanently as servants, artisans, or workers
for the Inca or the nobility.

Members of the Inca nobility were greatly privileged,
and those related to the Inca himself held the highest po-
sitions. The nobility were all drawn from the 10 royal ayl-
lus. In addition, the residents of Cuzco were given noble
status to enable them to serve in high bureaucratic posts.
The nobles were distinguished by dress and custom. Only
they were entitled to wear the large ear spools that en-
larged the ears and caused the Spaniards to later call them
orejones, or “big ears.” Noticeably absent in most of the Inca
Empire was a distinct merchant class. Unlike in Mesoamer-
ica, where long-distance trade was so important, the Incas’
etnphasis on self-sufficiency and state regulation of produc-
tion and surplus limited trade. Only in the northern areas
of the empire, in the chiefdoms of Ecuador, the last region
brought under Inca control, did a specialized class of trad-
ers exist.

Figure 8.6

This Inca sculpture, made of gold, portrays one of the mamaconas,
or “chosen women,” who served as concubines to the Inca emperors.
Fhe wool of her cloak is woven in a classic Inca design.

- The Inca imperial system, which controlled an area Wemer Forman/Art Resource, NY

of almost 3,000 miles, was a stunning achievement

of statecraft, but like all other empires it lasted only as long as it could control its
subject populations and its own mechanisms of government. A system of royal mul-
tiple marriages as a way of forging alliances created rival claimants for power and
the possibility of civil war. That is exactly what happened in the 1520s, just before
the Europeans arrived. When the Spanish first arrived in Peru, they saw an empire
Weakened by civil strife.

8.4.4 Inca Cultural Achievements

The Incas drew on the artistic traditions of their Andean predecessors and the skills of
subject peoples. Beautiful pottery and cloth were produced in specialized workshops.
Inca metalworking was among the most advanced in the Americas, and Inca artisans
worked gold and silver with great skill. The Incas also used copper and some bronze for
Weapons and tools. Like the Mesoamerican peoples, the Incas made no practical use of
the wheel, but unlike them, they had no system of writing. However, the Incas did use a
System of knotted strings, or quipu, to record numerical and perhaps other information.
It worked like an abacus, and with it the Incas took censuses and kept financial records.
The Incas had a passion for numerical order, arid the populace was divided into decimal

_ units from which population, military enlistment, and work details could be calculated.

The existence of so many traits associated with civilization in the Old World combined

yanas
A class of people within Inca
society removed from their
ayllus to serve permanently as
servants, artisans, or workers for
the Inca or the Inca nobility.

quipu

[KEE-poo] System of knotted
strings utilized by the Incas
in place of a writing system; ]
could contain numerical and
other types of information for
censuses and financial records. |


--- End of Page 19 ---
206 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

with the absence of a system of writing among the Incas illustrates the variations of j
human development and the dangers of becoming too attached to certain cultural char. 8.
acteristics or features in defining civilizations. 5 Wh:
The Incas’ genius was best displayed in their land and water management, exten. ares
sive road system, statecraft, and architecture and public buildings. They developeg
ingenious agricultural terraces on the steep slopes of the Andes, using a complex — Ratl
technology of irrigation to water their crops. The empire was linked together by al. its
most 2,500 miles of roads, many of which included rope suspension bridges ove; sudl
mountain gorges and rivers. Inca stonecutting was remarkably accurate; the best i
buildings were built of large fitted stones without the use of mortar. Some of these epia
buildings were immense. These structures, the large agricultural terraces and in. wel
gation projects, and the extensive system of rdads were among the Incas’ greatest | ye
achievements, displaying their technical ability 4s well as their ability to mobilize os
large amounts of labor. » and
: Col:
8.4.5 Comparing Incas and Aztecs a
The Inca and the Aztec cultures were based on a long development of civilization that- agt’
preceded them. Although in some areas of artistic and intellectual achievement earlier __ Wor
peoples had surpassed their accomplishments, both cultures represented the success _ agn
of imperial and military organization. Both empires were based on’intensive agricul- _
ture organized by a state that accumulated surplus production and then controlled the x icar
circulation of goods and their redistribution to groups or social classes, although the _ off
well-developed merchant class of Mesoamerica was mostly absent in the Inca realm. In ure
both states, older kinship-based institutions, the ayllu and the calpulli, were transformed —
by the emergence of a social hierarchy in which the nobility was increasingly predom- _ ;
iriant. In both areas, these nobles also were the personnel of the state, so that the state _ An
organization was almost an image of society. off
Although the Incas tried to create an overarching political state and to integrate the
their empire as a unit (the Aztecs did less in this regard), both empires recognized lo- que
cal ethnic groups and political leaders and allowed variation from one group or region. — Int
to another as long as. Inca or Aztec sovereignty was recognized and tribute was paid. tion
Both the Aztecs and the Incas, like the Spaniards who followed them, found that their int
military power was less effective against nomadic peoples who lived on their frontiers. mi
Essentially, the empires were created by the conquest of sedentary agricultural peoples det
and the extraction of tribute and labor from them. tiv
We cannot overlook the great differences between Mesoamerica and the Andean re- § hig
gion in terms of climate and geography or the differences between the Inca and Aztec the

civilizations. Trade and markets were far more developed in the Aztec Empire and ear- —
lier in Mesoamerica in general than in the Andean world. There were differences in met-
allurgy, writing systems, and social definition and hierarchy. But within the context of
world civilizations, it is probably best to view these two empires and the cultural areas
they represent as variations of similar patterns and processes, of which sedentary ag-
riculture is the most important. Basic similarities underlying the variations can also be
seen in systems of belief and cosmology and in social structure. Whether similar origins,
direct or indirect contact between the areas, or parallel development in Mesoamerica and §
the Andean area explains the similarity is unknown. But the American Indian civiliza-
tions shared much with each other; that factor and their isolation from external cultural
and biological influences gave them their peculiar character and their vulnerability. At
the same time, their ability to survive the shock of conquest and contribute to the forma-
tion of societies after conquest demonstrates much of their strength. Long after the Aztec
and Inca empires had ceased to exist, the peoples of the Andes and Mexico continued t0
draw on these cultural traditions. Ei}


--- End of Page 20 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 207

15 of g.5 The Other Peoples of the Americas
Char
What were the characteristic economic forms of American groups outside the two

xten: great imperial territories?

Oped Rather than seeing a division between “primitive” and “civilized” peoples in the Americas,
wplex itis more useful to consider gradations of material culture and social complexity. Groups
»v als such as the Incas had many things in common with the tribal peoples of the Amazon ba-
Over gin, such as the division into clans or halves—that is, a division of villages or communities
» best

into two major groupings with mutually agreed-upon roles and obligations. Moreover, as
we have seen, the diversity of ancient America forces us to reconsider ideas of human de-
velopment based on Old World examples. Social complexity, for example, was not nec-
essarily dependent on agriculture. In the Americas, some groups of fishers and hunters
and gatherers, such as the peoples of the northwest coast of the United States and British
Columbia, developed complex hierarchical societies. For those who see control of water for
agriculture as the starting point for political authority and the state, such societies as the
Pimas of Colorado and some of the chiefdoms of South America, who practiced irrigated
agriculture but did not develop states, also provide exceptions to theories based on Old
World evidence. Finally, archaeological finds in the Amazon now suggest that pottery and
agriculture may have developed there even before it did in the Andean region.

The civilizations of Mesoamerica and the Andes were high points of a Native Amer-
ican cultural achievement. However, the Americas continued to be occupied by a variety
of peoples who lived in different ways, ranging from highly complex sedentary agricul-
tural empires to simple kin-based bands of hunters and gatherers.

2 that
arlier
!ecess
ricul-
‘dthe
sh the
m.In
med
dom-
: state

8.5.1 How Many People?

Amajor issue that has fascinated students of the Americas for centuries is the question
of population size. For years after the European conquests, many observers discounted

‘grate the early descriptions of large and dense Indian populations as the exaggeration of con-

2d lo querors and missionaries who wanted to make their own exploits seem more impressive.

egion In the early twentieth century, the most repeated estimate of Native American popula-

paid. tion-about 1492 was 8.4 million (4 million in Mexico, 2 million in Peru, and 2.4 million

‘their in the rest of the hemisphere). Since that time, new archeological discoveries, a better

tiers. understanding of the impact of disease on indigenous populations, new historical and

coples demographic studies, and improved estimates of agricultural techniques and produc-
tivity have led to major revisions. Estimates still vary widely, and some have gone as

an Tes high as 112 million at the time of contact. Most scholars agree that Mesoamerica and

a the Andes supported the largest populations. Table 8.1 summarizes one of the most

ear: .

umelG Table 8.1 POPULATION ESTIMATE FOR THE WESTERN

ext of HEMISPHERE, 1492 _

areas. ———

'y ar 4 “a

Iso be North America:

igins, Mexico 21,400

aand Central America E 5,650

‘iliza- Caribbean 5,860

tural Andes. 41,500

ty. At ; Lowland South America 18,500

prema Total 67,300

Aztec

ed to SOURCES: William M. Deneven, The Native Population of the Americas in 1492 (1976), 289-292;

John D, Durand, “Historical Estimates of World Population,” Population and Development Review
3 (1967): 253-296; Russell Thornton, American Indian Holocaust and Survival (1 987).

--- End of Page 21 ---
208 = Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Table 8.2 WORLD POPULATION, c. 1500

Population’ iousands)

China 100,000-150,000
Indian subcontinent 75;000-150,000
Southwest Asia 20,000-30,000
Japan 2 15,000-20,000
Rest of Asia (except Russia) +8,000-30,000.
Europe (except Russia) 60,000-70,000
Russia (USSR) 10,000-18,000
Northern Africa 6,000-12,000
Rest of Africa .  30,000-60,000
Oceania . 4,000-2,000
Americas . Sea ~57,000-72,000-
Total : 389,000-61 4,000

i

SOURCES: William M. Deneven, The Native Population of the Americas in 1492 (1976), 289-292;
John D. Durand, “Historical Estimates of World Population,” Population and Development Review
3 (1957): 253-296; Russell Thornton, American Indian Holocaust and Survival (1987),

careful estimates, which places the total figure at more than 67 million, although a Native
American demographer has increased this figure to 72 million. Other scholars are still
unconvinced by these estimates.

These figures should be considered in a global context. In 1500, the population of
the rest of the world was probably about 500 million, of which China and India each |
had 75 million to 150 million people and Europe had 60 million to 70 million, a figure —
roughly equivalent to the population of the Americas (Table 8.2). If the modern estimates. _
are valid, the peoples of the Americas clearly made up a major segment of humanity.

8.5.2 Differing Cultural Patterns

Although it is impossible to summarize the variety of cultural patterns and lifeways
that existed in the Americas on the eve of contact with Europeans, we can describe the ’
major patterns outside the main civilization areas. Northern South America and part of ©
Central America were an intermediate area that shared many features with the Andes
and some with Mesoamerica and perhaps served as a point of cultural and material —
exchange between the two regions. In fact, with the exception of monumental architec:
ture, the intermediate zone chieftainships resembled the sedentary agriculture states in
many ways.
Similar kinds of chieftainships based on sedentary agriculture were found elsewhere
in the Americas. There is strong evidence of large chieftainships along the Amazon, where. |
the rich aquatic environment supported complex and perhaps hierarchical societies. —
The island Arawaks or Tainos encountered by Columbus on the Caribbean island of ©
Hispaniola were farmers organized in a hierarchical society and divided into chiefdoms.
These Indian chiefdom-level societies strongly resemble the societies of Polynesia. On the ~
bigger Caribbean islands, such as Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, chieftainships ruled over
dense populations, which lived primarily on the root crop manioc.
Agriculture was spread widely throughout the Americas by 1500. Some peoples, such
as those of the eastern North American woodlands and the coast of Brazil, combined ag-
riculture with hunting and fishing. Techniques such as slash-and-burn farming led to the
periodic movement of villages when production declined. Social organization in these 4
societies often remained without strong class divisions, craft specializations, or the de”
mographic density of people who practiced permanent, intensive agriculture. Unlike Eu
tope, Asia, and Africa, the Americas lacked nomadic herders. However, throughout the |

--- End of Page 22 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 209

Americas, from Tierra del Fuego to the Canadian forests, some
people lived in small, mobile, kin-based groups of hunters and
gatherers. Their material culture was simple, and their societies
were more egalitarian.

Nowhere is Native American diversity more apparent than
in North America. In that vast continent, by 1500, perhaps as
many as 200 languages were spoken, and a variety of cultures
reflected Indian adaptation to different ecological situations.
By that time, most concentrated towns of the Mississippian
mound-builder cultures had been abandoned, and only a few
groups in southeastern North America still maintained the so-
cial hierarchy and religious ideas of those earlier cultures. In the
Southwest, descendants of the Anasazi and other cliff dwellers
had taken up residence in the adobe pueblos mostly along the

Rio Grande (Figure 8.7), bib they practiced terracing and ae Taos Pueblo, in the foothills of what is now New Mexico. The
gation to supp ort their agriculture. Their rich religious life, their pueblos of the Rio Grande valley were based on agriculture and
artistic ceramic and weaving traditions, and their agricultural the concentration of population in urban areas. This reflected a
base reflected their own historical traditions. number of the traditions of the older Native American cultures of
Elsewhere in North America, most groups were hunters _ the southwestem United States.
and gatherers or, like the Iroquois of the Northeast or the Nat- Michael Runkel/Superstock/Alamy Stock Photo
chez of the Southeast, combined those activities with some ag-
ticulture. Sometimes an environment was so rich that complex social organization and
artistic specialization could develop without an agricultural base. This was the case
among the Indians of the northwest coast, who depended on the rich resources of the
sea. In other cases, technology was a limiting factor. The tough prairie grasses could not
be farmed easily without metal plows, nor could the buffalo be hunted effectively before
Europeans introduced the horse. Thus, the Great Plains were only sparsely occupied.
Finally, we should note that although there was great variation among the Indian
cultures, some aspects stood in contrast to contemporary societies in Europe and Asia.
With the exception of the state systems of Mesoamerica and the Andes, most Indian so-
cieties were strongly kin-based. Communal action and ownership of resources, such as
land and hunting grounds, were emphasized, and material wealth often was disregarded
or placed in a ritual or religious context. It was not that these societies were necessarily
egalitarian but rather that ranking usually was not based on wealth, Although they were
often subordinate, women in some societies held important political and social roles and
usually played a central role in crop production. Indians tended to view themselves as
part of the ecological system and not in control of it, balancing their hunting or farming
with existing resources. These attitudes stood in marked contrast to those of many con-
temporary European and Asian civilizations. .

Figure 8.7

8.5.3 American Diversity in the World Context.

By the end of the fifteenth century, two great imperial systems had risen to dominate the
two major centers of civilization in Mesoamerica and the Andes. Both empires were built
on the achievements of their predecessors, and both reflected a militaristic phase in their
atea’s development. These empires proved to be fragile, weakened by internal strains
and the conflicts that any imperial system creates but also limited by their technological
inferiority.

The Aztec and Inca empires were one end of a continuum of cultures that went from
the most simple to the most complex. The Americas contained a broad range of societies,
fom great civilizations with millions of people to small bands of-hunters. In many of
these societies, religion played a dominant role in defining the relationship between peo-
ple and their environment and between the individual and society. How these societies


--- End of Page 23 ---
210 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

would have developed and what course the American civilizations might have taken in
continued isolation remain interesting and unanswerable questions. The first European
observers were simultaneously shocked by the “primitive” tribespeople and astounded _
by the wealth and accomplishments of civilizations such as that of the Aztecs. Europeans
generally saw the Indians as curiously backward. In comparison with Europe and Asia,
the Americas did seem strange—more like ancient Babylon or Egypt than contemporary
China or Europe—except that without the wheel, large domesticated animals, the plow,
and to a large extent metal tools and written languages, even that. comparison is mig
leading. The isolation of the Americas had remained important in physical and cultura!

terms, but that isolation came to an end in 1492, with disastrous results.

Global Connections and Central Themes

The Americas and the World

Conditions in the Americas before 1492 reveal the importance
of global connections in Afro-Eurasia and the absence of
such connections in the Americas. American isolation from
effective global connections is exhibited by the absence of
key technologies, like ironworking and the wheel, that would
have been easily transmitted had contacts been available.
American isolation shows in the absence of the standard
range of domesticated animals. It would show, tragically, in the
absence of any immunity to some of the common contagious
diseases of Afro-Eurasia.

‘The absence of several features that had become normal in

Afro-Eurasia must be stated carefully and should not detract from 3 4

the impressive economic, cultural, and political achievemeris

of the key American indian civilizations, including -their ability ;
(particularly in Mesoamerica) to sustain dense populations. The
absence of these features should not obscure the heritage of —
these societies to later patterns in the Americas. The comparative
distinctions that resulted from lack of wider contact would count ;
only when the Americas were forced into new global connections

after 1492 —but then they mattered greatly.

Further Readings !

an understanding of the Mesoamerican cosmology and his —

Charles C. Mann, 1491 (2005) provides a well-written over-
view of many aspects of Native American cultures and
accomplishments. Mary Miller, Art of Mesoamerica: From
Olmec to Aztec (2006) surveys evidence from archaeology
and art history. Friedrich Katz’s The Ancient Civilizations of
the Americas, 2nd revised ed. (1997) provides the best over-
all survey that compares Mesoamerica and Peru. It traces
the rise of civilization in both areas. Michael Coe et al.,
Atlas of Ancient America (1986), includes excellent maps,
illustrations, and an intelligent and comprehensive text.
The literature on the Aztecs continues to grow rapidly.
Bernardino de Sahagtin’s Florentine Codex: The General
History of the Things of New Spain, ed. and trans. Charles
Dibble and Arthur J. O. Anderson, 12 vols. (1950-1968),
is a fundamental source that most scholars still use as a
starting point. Good overviews are provided by Frances
Berdan’s The Aztecs of Central Mexico: An Imperial Society,
2nd ed. (2005), and Michael E. Smith, The Aztecs (2012).
Miguel Leon-Portilla’s Fifteen Aztec Poets (1992) deals
with religion and philosophy in a sympathetic way while
David Carrasco, in Religions of Mesoamerica: Cosmovision and
Ceremonial Centers (1990), tries to integrate archaeology into

City of Sacrifice (2000) puts religious violence into context.

Elizabeth Boone, Stories in Red and Black: Pictorial Histories —
of the Aztecs and Mixtecs (2000) discusses writing systems 3
while Ross Hassig, Aztec Warfare (1988), examines theit
military organization, and Inga Clendinnen, The Cost of
Courage in Aztec Society (2010), provides thoughtful essays
on their philosophy of war. Barbara Mundy, The Death of —
Aztec Tenochtitlan, the Life of Mexico City (2015) provides an —
urban, ecological, and architectural history of the capital —
city. Manuel Aguilar-Moreno, Handbook to Life in the Aztec —
World (2006), is a useful encyclopedia on many aspects of —

Aztec culture.

On Peru, a good overview through solid scholarly :

articles is provided in Richard W. Keatinge, ed., Peruviatt
Prehistory (1988). The article on Inca archeology by Craig
Morris is especially helpful. Also useful is Michael Moseley,

The Incas and Their Ancestors (1992). Art and archeology ate —
the focus of Rebecca Stone Miller, Art of the Andes from Chavin.
to Inca (1995). Maria Rostoworowski de Diez Canseco;

History of the Inca Realm (1996), integrates historical and
archeological sources, while Juan de Betanzos, Narrative of


--- End of Page 24 ---
the Incas (1996), makes a classic available to modern read-
1s, Terence D’altroy, The Incas (2002), integrates anthro-
4 logy and archaeology. John Murra’s classic The Economic
Erganization of the Inca State (1980) has influenced much
thinking about the Incas. J. Hyslop’s The Inca Road System
(1984) examines the building and function of the road net-
work, and Carolyn Dean, A Culture of Stone: Inka Perspectives
on Rock (2010) underlines the spiritual meaning of stones
and of construction in Inca culture. The work of Gary Urton,
The History of a Myth: Pacarigtambo and the Origin of the Inka
1990), and Frank Salomon, The Code Keepers (2004), on the
quipus show how ethnohistory is deepening our under-
standing of Inca society. Interesting social history is now be-
ing done. Irene Silverblatt’s Moon, Sun, and Witches: Gender
Ideologies and Class in Inca and Colonial Peru (1987) is a con-
troversial book on the position of women before, during,
and after the Inca rise to power. Richard L. Burger and Lucy
C. Salazasr, eds. Machu Picchu: Unveiling the Mystery of the
Incas (2004) provides studies of the most famous Inca arche-
ological site. Brian S. Bauer, The Development of the Inca State

(1996), offers an interpretation of government and rule.
In Geoffrey W. Conrad and Arthur A. Demerest’s Reli-

gion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and Inca Expansionism

Chapter 8: The Americas 211

(1984), two archeologists compare the political systems of
the two empires and the motivations for expansion. The
authors find more similarities than differences. On the
native peoples who lived north of Mesoamerica there is
an extensive literature. Colin G. Calloway, One Vast Win-
ter Count (2003), provides an excellent and up-to-date
overview, while Linda Cordell, Ancient Pueblo Peoples
(1994), and George Miner, The Moundbuilders: Ancient
Peoples of Eastern North America (2004), provide more detail.
Carroll L. Riley, Becoming Aztlan: Mesoamerican Influence
in the Greater Southwest, AD 1200-1500 (2005) weighs the
evidence on the possible ties between Mesoamerica and the
Anasazi and other groups. Timothy R. Pauketat, Cahokia:
Ancient America’s Great City on the Mississippi (2009), is a
good starting point on Mississippian cultures that suggests
inspiration from Mesoamerica. Finally, on the question of
the populations of the Americas, see Noble D. Cook, Born
to Die (1998), which tries to establish the populations when
post-1492 contact took place, and Massimo Livi-Bacci,
Conquest: The Destruction of American Indios (2008) dismisses
monocausal explanations of Indian population decline
and discusses the size of indigenous populations before
conquest.

ing Questions

j. What were the strengths and weaknesses of the Aztec
Empire?

2. What were the main similarities and differences

between the Aztec and Inca empires?

3. What are the key issues involved in trying to under-
stand Aztec religious practices?

4, What were the most important differences between
Central American and Andean civilizations; and the
major societies of Africa, Asia, and Europe between
about 1200 and 1450?


--- End of Page 25 ---
