Figure 7.1
In 1324, Mansa Musa, King of Mali,
made a pilgrimage to Mecca that
brought the attention of the Muslim
world to the wealth of his kingdom.
A Jewish cartographer in Spain,
Abraham Cresques, depicted the
trip more than fifty years later in
this map. Mansa Musa is depicted
at the bottom right with a golden
scepter and crown, symbolizing his
royal power, and an enormous gold
nugget, symbolizing his country’s.
wealth.

Science History Images/Alamy Stock
Photo

~~ Contents and Learning Objectives

er reading each section, you should be able to answer these questions:
%
African Societies: Diversity and Similarities

What were the main political and religious forms in sub-Saharan
Africa, and what were some of the principal regional patterns?
Kingdoms of the Grasslands

How did the Sudanic kingdoms develop in the Sahel, and.what
advantages did they have?

73 The Swahili Coast of East Africa

How integrated into international commerce were the cities of East

__ Africa, and why? |
“4 Peoples of the Forest and Plains
What kinds of political organization developed in Central and
Southern Africa? 7

--- End of Page 1 ---
166 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 12UU-145U

IN 1324, A'GREAT CARAVAN OF more than a hundred camels, many slaves, and a mul-
titude of retainers crossed the arid Sahara desert and wended its way into Cairo, on the
banks of the Nile. Mansa Musa, lord of the African empire of Mali, was making the haj,
the pilgrimage to Mecca, distributing gold with an open hand. The wealth and prodigal-
ity of the young king dazzled all who witnessed it, his polished manners and command
of Arabic impressed those who met him, and his fame spread throughout the Islamic
world and beyond. The chronicler al-Omari, who visited Cairo a dozen years later, re-
ported that people still spoke of the entourage of the young king that had spent so much
gold in the markets and had given so much as gifts and alms that the price of gold actu-
ally declined due to its ample supply. Other great caravans had made the trek from Mali
across the desert before, and some came after, but none had been so magnificent. Mansa
Musa’s caravan symbolized the wealthy potential of Africa, but even by the time he made
his trip, West African gold was already well known in the world economy, and Africa was.
already involved in contacts of various kinds with other areas of the world (Figure 7.1).

Mali, the kingdom of this great lord, fascinated the Muslim observers in Cairo,
Damascus, and Fez. Like the earlier kingdom of Ghana, Mali was another state of the sa-
vanna country, between the desert and the forests of West Africa. Mali was formed by the
Malinke peoples, and its access to gold and control of the caravan routes had promoted
its rise, while its powerful army had created an empire that extended over much of the
savanna from the Niger to the Senegal River. Its ruling farhilies had converted to Islam,
but the famous and cosmopolitan Moroccan traveler Abdallah Ibn Battuta, who visited
Mali not long after Mansa Musa’s pilgrimage, found the local customs and food less re-
fined than those of the elegant courts to which he was accustomed, and he found some
of the practices shocking. Yet much was recognizable to him as well. Mali was an African
kingdom that had become an extension of the Islamic world, and its success was tied to
the trade routes that linked it to the Mediterranean and the Middle East.

The history of Mali underlines the fact that Africa below the Sahara was never totally
isolated from the centers of civilization in Egypt, West Asia, or the Mediterranean, but
for long periods the contacts were difficult and intermittent. This chapter will examine*
the increasing impact of a growing international network on Africa roughly in the period
M between 1200 and 1600 c.z. The arrival of Islam, after 800 -¢.2., had transformed many
aspects of life in some African societies and brought them into wider contacts through
j trade, politics, and cultural exchange. But we must also recognize that the African societies
influenced by Islam often maintained their own traditions and that other African regions
remained little touched by Islam and continued to develop along their own trajectories.
It is also important to realize that interactions with North Africa and the Middle East did
not extend to direct encounters with the great Mongol Empire during this crucial period.
African civilizations built somewhat less clearly on prior societies than did other
civilizations around 1200. Some earlier themes, such as the Bantu migration and the
, formation of large states in the Western Sudan, noted in Chapter 2, persisted. Overall,
sub-Saharan Africa remained a varied and distinctive setting; parts of it, like the port
cities of the East African coast, were drawn into new contacts with the growing world
network, but much of it retained a certain isolation or cultural autonomy. The spread of
universal faiths like Islam and Christianity was an important aspéct of African history in
this period, but much of Central and Southern Africa was relatively unaffected by these
outside influences.


--- End of Page 2 ---
| African Societies: Diversity and
ilarities

¢ were the main political and religious forms in sub-Saharan Africa, and what
ysome of the principal regional patterns?

tinent—the world’s second largest—Africa is so vast and its societies so diverse
is almost impossible to generalize about them. Differences in geography, language,
n, politics, and other aspects of life contributed to Africa’s lack of political unity
periods of time. Unlike in many parts of Asia, Europe, and North Africa, nei-
universal states nor universal religions characterized the history of sub-Saharan Af-
Yet universal religions, first Christianity and later Islam, did find adherents in Africa
‘sometimes contributed to the formation of large states and empires.”
ican societies developed diverse forms, from stateless societies organized around
ip or age sets to large centralized states, and within this diversity were many shared
of language and beliefs. Universalistic faiths penetrated the continent and served.
ie basis for important cultural developments in Nubia and Ethiopia.

¢

600 c.c. 1000 c.c. 1200 ce.

600-700 1000 1200

islam spreads across Ghana at-height of its power Rise of the empire of Mali
North Africa 1100 1260

Almoravid movement in the Death of Sundiata; earliest
Sahara stone buildings at-Zimbabwe;
Lalibela.rules in Ethiopia;
Yoruba culture fiourishes at
Hle-lfe

1300

Mali at its height; Kanem
Empire is a.rivat

1324

Pilgrimage of Mansa Musa

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 167

1400 ce.

1400

Flourishing of cities of Timbuktu
and Djenne; Ethiopian Christian
kingdom; Swahili cities flourish
on east African coast

1417, 1431

Last Chinese trade voyages to
East Africa

1500

Songhay Empire flourishes;
Benin at height of power
1400-c. 1550

Great Zimbabwe at height, gold
and international trade

1 Societies with and without States
e African societies had rulers who exercised control through a hierarchy of officials in

hat can be called states, but others were politically decentralized societies organized
d kinship or other forms of obligation and lacking the concentration of political
wer and authority we normally associate with the state. Sometimes the decentralized
‘ties were larger and more extensive than the neighboring states. Societies lacking
€ organization had forms of government, but the authority and power normally exer-
by a ruler and his court in a kingdom could be held instead by a council of families
by the community, with no need to tax the population to support the ruler, the bureau-
ts, the army, or the nobles, as was usually the case in state-building societies. Stateless
eties had little concentration of authority, and it affected only a small part of the peo-
8’ lives. In these societies, government was rarely a full-time occupation, and there
8S No political class. Such societies often were less hierarchical and more egalitarian.

~ Other alternatives to formal government were possible. Among peoples of the West
ican forest, secret societies of men and women controlled customs and beliefs and
te able to limit the authority of rulers. Especially among peoples who had sharp ri-
ies between lineages or family groupings, secret societies developed that cut across
lineage divisions. Members’ allegiance to these groups transcended their lineage ties.
Secret societies settled village disputes. They acted to maintain stability within the
“munity, and they served as an alternative to the authority of state institutions.

politically decentralized
societies

African societies organized
around kinship or other forms
of obligation and lacking the
concentration of political power
and authority associated with
formal states.

--- End of Page 3 ---
Throughout Africa many decentralized societies thrived, perhaps aided by the facy
that internal social pressures or disputes often could be resolved by allowing dissident,
to leave and establish a new village in the sparsely populated continent. Still, decen.
tralized societies found it difficult to resist external pressures, mobilize for warfare, oy.
ganize large building projects, or create stable conditions for continuous long-distance
trade with other peoples. All these needs or goals contributed to the formation of states
in sub-Saharan Africa.

State-building took place under a variety of conditions. For example, West Africa ex-
perienced both the cultural influence of Islam and its own internal developments. The
formation of some powerful states, such as Mali and Songhay, depended more on milj-
tary power and dynastic alliances than on ethnic or cultural unity. In this development
and in the process of state formation itself, Africa paralleled the roughly contemporane-
ous developments of Western Europe. The growth of city-states with strong merchant
communities in West Africa and on the Indian Ocean coast bore certain similarities to the
urban developments of Italy and Germany in this period. However, disparities between |
the technologies and ideologies of Europeans and Africans also created differences in the
ways these societies developed. That was made clear with the arrival of Europeans—the
Portuguese—in the fifteenth century whose contact drew Africans increasingly into the
world economy in ways that transformed African development in the following centuries,

7.1.2 Common Elements in African Societies

Even amid the diversity of African cultures, certain similarities in language, thought, and
religion provided some underlying unities. The spread of the Bantu-speaking peoples
provided a linguistic base across much of Africa, so that even though specific languages
differed, structure and vocabulary allowed some mutual understanding between neigh-
boring Bantu speakers. .

The same might be said of the animistic religion that characterized much of Africa.
From the continent's earliest beginnings people held a belief that a soul or spirit existed
in every object, even if it was inanimate. In a future state this soul or spirit would exist
as part of an immaterial soul. The spirit, therefore, was thought to be universal. Africans,
like Europeans, believed that some evil, disasters, and illnesses were produced by witch-
craft. Specialists were needed to combat the power of evil and eliminate the witches. This
led in many societies to the existence of a class of diviners or priests who guided reli-
gious practice and helped protect the community. Above all, African religion provided
a cosmology—a view of how the universe worked—and a guide to éthics and behavior.

Many African peoples shared an underlying belief in a creator deity whose power
and action were expressed through spirits or. lesser gods and through the founding an-
cestors of the group. The ancestors often were viewed as the first settlers and thus the
“owners” of the land or the local resources. Through them, the fertility of the land, game,
people, and herds could be ensured. Among some groups, working the land took on reli-
gious significance, so the land itself had a meaning beyond its economic usefulness.

Religion, economics, and history were thus closely intertwined. The family, lineage,
or clan around which many African societies were organized also had an important role _
in dealing with the gods. Deceased ancestors often were a direct link between their liv-
ing relatives and the spirit world. Veneration of the ancestors and gods was part of the
same system of belief. Such a system was strongly linked to specific places and people.
It showed remarkable resiliency even in the face of contact with monotheistic religions
such as Islam and Christianity.

The economies of Africa are harder to describe in general terms than some basic as-
pects of politics and culture. North Africa, fully involved in the Mediterranean and Arab
economic world, stands clearly apart. Sub-Saharan Africa varied gieatly from one region
to the next. In many areas, settled agriculture and skilled ironwork had been established

--- End of Page 4 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 169

r Fore or advanced rapidly during the postclassical period. Specialization encouraged
sive local and regional trade, the basis for many lively markets and the many large
jes that grew in both the structured states and the decentralized areas. The bustle and
ty of market life were important ingredients of African society, and women as well
en participated actively. Professional merchants, in many cases in hereditary kinship
pings, often controlled trade. Participation in international trade increased in many
gions in this period, mainly with the Islamic world and often through Arab traders. ‘
: Finally, one of the least-known aspects of early African societies is the size and dy-
ynics of their populations. This is true not only of Africa but of much of the world.
§ aeological evidence, travelers’ reports, and educated guesses are used to estimate
e population of early African societies, but in truth, our knowledge of how Africa fits
fo the general trends of the world population is very slight. By 1500, Africa may have
430 million to 60 million inhabitants. :

1.3 The Arrival of Islam in North Africa

frica north of the Sahara had long been part of the world of classical antiquity, with

tions with both Greece and Rome. Toward the end of the Roman Empire, Christianity

taken a firm hold in Mediterranean Africa, and with the rise of Islam and its sweep

oss the Maghrib or Western North Africa, and into Spain, the ties to the Mediterranean Maghrib

world became even closer. [MAH-gribb] The Arabic word for
Islam offered many attractions within Africa. Its fundamental teaching that all Western North Africa.

fuslims are equal within the community of believers made the acceptance of conquer-

; and new rulers easier. The Islamic tradition of uniting the powers of the state and

eligion in the person of the ruler or caliph appealed to some African kings as a way

af reinforcing their authority. The concept that all members of the umma, or commu-

nity of believers, were equal put the newly converted Berbers and later Africans on an

ual footing with the Arabs, at least in law. Despite these egalitarian and somewhat

pian ideas within Islam, practices differed considerably at local levels. Social stratifi-

ion remained important‘in Islamicized societies, and ethnic distinctions also divided

believers. Despite certain teachings on the equality between men and women, the

fine for killing a man was twice that for killing a woman. The disparity between law and

ctice—between equality before God and inequality within the world—sometimes led

to utopian reform movements.

7.14 The Christian Kingdoms: Nubia and Ethiopia

Islam was not the first universalistic religion to take root in Africa, and the wave of Arab
conquests across Northern Africa had left behind it islands of Christianity. Christian con-
Yerts had been made in Egypt and Ethiopia even before the conversion of the Roman
Er pire in the fourth century c.z. In addition to the Christian kingdom of Axum,
Christian communities thrived in Egypt and Nubia, farther up the Nile. The Christians
of Egypt, the Copts, developed a rich tradition in contact with Byzantium, translating
the gospels and other religious literature from Greek to Coptic, their own tongue, which
based on the language of ancient Egypt. On doctrinal and political issues, they even-
lally split from the Byzantine connection. When Egypt was conquered by Arab armies
id then converted to Islam, the Copts were able to maintain their faith; Muslim rulers
cognized them as followers of a revealed religion and thus entitled to a certain toler-
ance. The Coptic influence had already spread up the Nile into Nubia, the ancient land
9f Kush. Muslim attempts to penetrate Nubia were met with such stiff resistance in the
inth century that the Christian descendants of ancient Kush were left as independent
bristian kingdoms until the thirteenth century. "

__ The Ethiopian kingdom that grew from Axum was perhaps the most important
ican Christian outpost. Cut off from Christian Byzantium by the Muslim conquest of


--- End of Page 5 ---
Figure 7.2

This extraordinary thirteenth-century
church, Set Giorgis, represents
the power of early Christianity
in Ethiopia. It was one of a great
complex of 11 churches that
King Lalibela believed God had
commanded him to build. Dedicated
to St. George, the patron saint
of Ethiopia, it was cut out of the
bedrock of the earth. Its raof, in
the shape of an enormous cross,
lies at ground level. Although it is

* surrounded by impassable walls and
can be reached only by way of an
underground tunnel carved in stone,
it is still used for worship today.

Gilad Flesch/PhatoStock-Israel/Alamy
Stock Photo

Sahel

The northern grassland region
of sub-Saharan Africa, stretching
south of the desert.

Egypt and the Red Sea coast, surrounded by pagan neighbors, and probably influenced —
by pagan and Jewish immigrants from Yemen, the Christian kingdom turned inward. Its
people occupied the Ethiopian highlands, living in fortified towns and supporting them-
selves with agriculture on terraced hilisides. Eventually, thtough a process of warfare,
conversion, and compromise with non-Christian neighbors, a new dynasty emerged,
which under King Lalibela (d. 1221) sponsored a remarkable building project in which 11
great churches were sculpted from the rock in the town that bore his name (Figure 7.2).

In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, an Ethiopian Christian state emerged un-
der a dynasty that traced its origins back to the biblical marriage of Solomon and Sheba.
Using the Ge’ez language of Axum as a religious language and Amharic as the common
speech, this state maintained its brand of Christianity in isolation while facing constant
pressure from its increasingly Muslim neighbors.

The struggle between the Christian state in the Ethiopian highlands and the
Muslim peoples in Somalia and on the Red Sea coast shaped much of the history of
the region and continues to do so today. When one of these Muslim states, with help
from the Ottoman Turks, threatened the Ethiopian kingdom, a Portuguese expedi-
tion arrived in 1542 at Massawa on the Red Sea and turned the tide in favor of its
Christian allies. Portuguese attempts thereafter to bring Ethiopian Christianity into
the Roman Catholic Church failed, and Ethiopia remained isolated, Christian, and
fiercely independent.

7.2 Kingdoms of the Grasslands

How did the Sudanic kingdoms develop in the Sahel, and what advantages did
they have?

In the Sahel grasslands, several powerful states emerged that combined Islamic religion
and culture with local practices. The kingdoms of Ghana, Mali, and Songhay and the
Hausa states were African adaptations of Islam and its fusion with African traditions.
On the edge of the desert, where several resource zones cathe together, African
states such as Ghana had already formed by the eighth century by exchanging gold
from the forests of West Africa for salt or dates from the Sahara or for goods from


--- End of Page 6 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 171

erranean North Africa.Camels, which had been introduced from Asia to the Sa-

between the first and fifth centuries c.z., had greatly improved the possibilities of

ade, but these animals, which thrived in arid and semiarid environments, could not

in the humid forest zones because of disease. Thus, the Sahel, the extensive grass-

d belt at the southern edge of the Sahara, became a point of exchange between the

4 ests to the south and North Africa—an active border area where ideas, trade, and

eople from the Sahara and beyond arrived in increasing numbers. Along the Sahel, .
ral African states developed between the trading cities, taking advantage of their

on as intermediaries in the trade. But their location on the open plains of the dry

hel also meant that these states were subject to attack and periodic droughts.

, 1 Sudanic States

4e Sudanic states that formed in the grasslands often had a patriarch or council of el- Sudanic

rs of a particular family or group of lineages as leaders. Usually these states had a __A term describing the major

ritorial core area in which the people were of the same linguistic or ethnic background, African languages spoken from

ut their power extendéd over subordinate communities. These were conquest states, Ethiopia to Senegal.

hich drew on the taxes, tribute, and military support of the subordinate areas, lineages,

ad villages. The effective control of subordinate societies and the legal or informal con-

9] of their sovereignty are the usual definition of empires. The Sudanic states of Ghana,

fali, and Songhay fit that definition (Map 7.1).

_ The rulers of these states were considered sacred and were surrounded by rituals

at separated them from their subjects. Islam was used to reinforce indigenous ideas of

hip, so that Islam became something of a royal cult. Much of the population never

yverted, and the Islamicized ruling families also drew on their traditional powers to

rtify their rule. Sundiata

Several savanna states rose among the various peoples in the Sudan. We can trace The “Lion Prince”; a member of

development and culture of two of the most important, Mali and Songhay, as exam- _ the Keita clan; created a unified

es of the fusion of Islamic and indigenous African cultures within the context of trade state that became the Mali
military expansion. Empire; died about 1260.

juula

[}00-luh] Malinke merchants;
formed small partnerships

to carry out trade throughout
Mali Empire; eventually spread
throughout much of West Africa.

2.2 The Empire of Mali and Sundiata, —
e “Lion Prince” Map 7.1 EMPIRES OF THE WESTERN SUDAN

he empire of Mali, centered between the Senegal and Niger
“ad was the creation of the Malinke peoples, who in the thir-
enth century broke away from the control of Ghana, which
as by then in decline. In Mali the old forms of kingship were
inforced by Islam. As in many of the Sudanic states, the rul-
S supported Islam by building mosques, attending public
tayers, and supporting preachers. In return, sermons to the
ithful emphasized obedience and support of the king. Mali
came a model of these Islamicized Sudanic kingdoms. The
‘nomic basis of society in the Mali Empire was agriculture.
ns was combined with an active tradition of trade in many
rod ‘ucts, although like Ghana, Mali also depended on its ac-
SS to gold-producing areas to the south. Malinke merchants, ea EAN RIC OCEAN
Fjuula, formed small partnerships and groups to carry out. |
de throughout the area. They spread beyond the borders of = Nara cones
‘empire and throughout much of West Africa. wees, sora i ae |
_ The beginning of Malinke (also called Mande, or sotzat ‘ther moor states
Mandinka or Mandingo) expansion is attributed to Sundiata
“Snietimes written Sunjata), a brilliant leader whose exploits


--- End of Page 7 ---
fie Faflil: ine mongol Age, 1ZuU-140U

griots

[grEE O, grEE ot] Professiorial
oral historians who served
as keepers of traditions and
advisors to kings within the
Mali Empire.

Timbuktu’

Port city of Mali; located just off
the flood plain on the great bend
in the Niger River; population of
50,000; contained a library and ,
university. .

were celebrated in a great oral tradition. The griots, professional oral historians who
also served as keepers of traditions and advisors to kings, began their epic histories of
Mali with Sundiata; whom they called the “Lion Prince,” or “the father of the Bright
Country,” and “the master of a hundred kings.”

After a difficult childhood, Sundiata emerged from a period of interfamily and
regional fighting to create a unified state. Oral histories ascribed to him the creation of thé
basic rules and relationships of Malinke society and the outline of the government of the
empire of Mali. Hé became the mansa, or emperor. It was said that Sundiata “divided up
the world,” which meant that he was considered the originator of social arrangements,
Sixteen clans of free people were entitled to bear arms and carry the bow and quiver
of arrows as the symbol of their status, five clans were devoted to religious duties, and
four clans were specialists such as blacksmiths and griots. Such clan arrangements were
traditional among the peoples of the savanna and had existed in ancient Ghana, but now
Sundiata was credited with their origins. Although he created the political institutions of
rule that allowed for great regional and ethnic differences in the federated provinces, he
also stationed garrisons to maintain loyalty and security. Travel was secure, and crime
was severely punished, as Ibn Battuta (1304-1368 c.r.), the Arab traveler, reported: “Of
all peoples,” he said, “the Blacks are those who most hate injustice, and their emperor
pardons none who is guilty of it.” The security of travelers and their goods was an
essential element in a state where commerce played so important a role.

Sundiata died about 1260, but his successors expanded the borders of Mali un-
til it controlled most of the Niger valley almost to the Atlantic coast. A sumptuous
court was established and hosted a large number of traders. Mali grew wealthy from
the trade. Perhaps the most famous of Sundiata’s successors was Mansa Kankan
Musa (c. 1312-1337), whose pilgrimage to Mecca in 1324 brought the attention of
the Muslim world to Mali, as was described in the beginning of this chapter. Mansa
Musa’s trip had other consequences as well. From Mecca he brought back poet and
architect Ishak al-Sahili, who came from Muslim Spain. The architect directed the
building of several important mosques, and eventually a distinctive form of Sudanic
architecture developed that made use of beaten clay. This can still be seen in the
great mosque of Djenne.

7.2.3 City Dwellers and Villagers

The cities of the Western Sudan began to resemble those of North Africa, but with a
distinctive local architectural style. The towns were commercial and often included
craft specialists and a resident foreign merchant community. The military expansion of
states such as Ghana, Mali, and later Songhay contributed to their commercial success
because the power of the state protected traders. A cosmopolitan court life developed
as merchants and scholars were attracted by the power and protection of Mali. Ma-
linke traders ranged across the Sudan and exploited their position as intermediaries.
Cities of commercial exchange flourished, such as Djenne and Timbuktu, which lay
just off the flood plain on the great bend in the Niger River. Timbuktu was reported to
have a population of 50,000, and by the fourteenth century, its great Sankore mosque
contained a library and an associated university where scholars, jurists, and Muslim
theologians studied. The book was the symbol of civilization in the Islamic world, and
it was said that the book trade in Timbuktu was the most lucrative business.

For most people in the empire of Mali and the other Sudanic states, life was not
centered on the royal court, the great mosque, or long-distance trade but rather on the
agricultural cycle and the village. Making a living from the land was the preoccupation
of most people, and about 80 percent of the villagers lived by farming. This was a diffi-
cult life. The soils of the savanna were sandy and shallow. Plows were rarely used. The
villagers were people of the hoe who looked to the skies in the spring for the first rains

--- End of Page 8 ---
remains so today.

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 173

start their planting. Rice in the river valleys, millet, sorghums, some wheat, fruits,
4 vegetables provided the basis of daily life in the village and supplied the caravan
jc. Even large farins rarely exceeded 10 acres, and most were much smaller. Clear-
and often was done communally, accompanied by feasts and competitions, but
. farms belonged to families and were worked by them. A man with two wives and
al unmarried sons could work more land than a man with one wife and a smaller
Polygamy, the practice of having multiple wives, was common in the region, .

Document

 Ofal traditions take various forms. Some are simply the
“shared stories of a family or people, but in many west African
"societies, the mastery of oral traditions is a skill practiced by
 gricts. Although today’s griots are professional musicians and
bards, historically they held important places at the courts
| of west African kingdoms. The epic of Sundiata or Sunjata
as he is called in some versions, the great ruler of Mali,
“has been passed down orally for centuries. There are many
‘versions. In the following excerpts from a version collected in
4994 among the Mande people of Guinea by David Conrad
‘with the assistance the African scholars Djobba Kamara
‘ and Lansana Magassouba, the complex mix tradition, fable,
history, and divination is apparent. [David C. Conrad, éd. and
"trans. Sunjata. A New Prose Version (Indianapolis: Hackett
" Publishing, 2016), pp. 118-121.] In the preservation of these
epics the role of the griots, the professional bards who are
‘the depositors of the past play an essential role to preserve
‘the memory of great kings and great events, because as they
believed, knowing the past would help to understand the
"future. Their aim is to instruct and entertain. The griots do
| not believe that written history is better than the narrative that
| “they express with the depth and feeling of the human voice.
| As some of them argue, great prophets did not write their
| Message, but their words were no less true.
‘ The following excerpt describes a maior battle fought by
_ Sundiata, the founder of the Mali empire against the forces
of Sumaworo, king of the Sosos, who had taken control of
| Mali while Sundiata was in exile, and who was often called
| an evil sorcerer in versions of these. epics. Sundiata was
accompanied by a major ally named Fakoli, the king of a
Neighboring kingdom, himself a powerful sorcerer, and the
_ founder of many blacksmith lineages and thus associated
: with the importance of iron weapons and tools. Note here the
interweaving of family rivalry and politics, competitive claims
| of family association with the kingdom, and with origins in
_ Arabia and thus by implication with Islam, the celebration of
4 Sundiata’s prowess, and the high value placed on horses and
| thus cavalry, the key to military power in the savanna.

The Great Oral Tradition and the Epic of Sundiata

The two rivals meet. Sumaworo, who is older, challenges
Sunjata’s claims to rule and denigrates him as an upstart
youngster.

..the Mande people seem to think you are their mansa
{king], and it is true that you would not be here if you did not
have some power, but that power will do no good against
me. | told you before. . . that if the Mande people.sent you to
fight against me, you should refuse. As you now know | have
become like hot ashes surrounding Manden and Soso; any
toddler who tries to cross me will be burned up to his thighs.
And yet you are here.

{Sunjata responded] Ah, father Sumaworo, as | told you,
this is my father’s home, not yours. You are not from here.
Your father came from Folonegbe; your father was a latecomer
to Manden. You are only the second generation of your people
in Manden, but we [the Keita clan] have been here for eight
generations: our ancestor Mamadi Kani first came here from
Hejaji [Hejaz]

The battle then began:

The two armies were waiting. Soso on one side, Manden
on the other. Everybody was watching the commanders on
the battlefield. Fakoli stood off one side of Sunjata; Turama’an
[another general] on the other. Sumaworo was also flanked
by his men.

Sunjata, Sumaworo, and their men dashed across the
field and up the hill. Near the top of the hill, they faded from

sight; even as the dust disappeared. Soon they reached -:

the edge of a very deep ravine. Gathering all her strength,
Sunjata’s [magical] mare jumped the ravine and landed on the
other side. When Sumaworo’s horse tried to jump the ravine, it
tumbied to the bottom. Fakoli and Turama’an—~whose horses
safely jumped the ravine—turned and, with Sunjata, went to
look down at Sumaworo who was trapped at the bottom of
the ravine.

Sunjata called down, “Sumaworo, what is the matter?”

*,..Kill me here; do not carry me to the town. Do not bring
such shame on me. God controls all time. Please do not take
me back.”

--- End of Page 9 ---
PW He minigun rage, HOU ru

Sunjata said, “I am not going to finish*you off. No one
can climb out of that ravine; you’re stuck. . . Turning to his
companions he said, “Come, let’s gohome.” «x

They had gone some distance when Fakoli made a
decision, turned and went back to the ravine... . Taking his axe
from his shoulder, Fakoli struck Sumaworo on the head, poh!

He said, “This will be mentioned in Ma‘an Sunjata’s praise
song.” [And he was right] Though we sing, “Head-breaking
Mari Jata [an honorary title for Sundiata] it was really Fakoli
who broke Sumaworo’s head. . .

According to the Griot, Fakoli returned three times to
strike Sumaworo, each blow adding to the praise song of
Sunjata and of his victory. Sunjata and his men returned home
and as the epic celebrates “laughter returned to manden and

eventually Soso joined in” as Sunjata began to organize an,
reform the new unified Mali empire.

SOURCE: Sunjata: A New Prose Version, edited and translated by David 0,
Conrad, Copyright © 2016 by Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. Reprinted by
permission of Hackett Publishing Company, Inc. All rights reserved.

Review Questions:

1. Can oral traditions be used like other sources?

2. Even if they are not entirely true, do they have historical
value?

3. Judging from this epic, how did people of the Sudan
define the qualities of a king?

4, What aspects of the epic reveal contacts between this”
part of Africa and the wider world?

Songhay

{sohng-HEYE] Successor state
to Mali; dominated middle
reaches of Niger valley; formed
as independent kingdom under
a Berber dynasty; capital at Gao;
reached imperial status under
Sunni Ali (r. 1464-1492).

Muhammad the Great
Islamic ruler of the mid-
sixteenth century; extended
the boundaries of the Songhay
Empire.

the

Given the difficulties of the soil, the periodic droughts, insect pests, storage Pprob-
lems, and the limitations of technology, the farmers of the Sudanic states—by the meth-
ods of careful cultivation, crop rotation, and, in places such as Timbuktu, the use of
irrigation—were able to provide for their people the basic foods that supported them and
the imperial states en which they were based. The hoe and the bow became symbols of
the common people of the savanna states.

7.24 The Songhay Kingdom ,

As the power of Mali began to wane,.a successor state from within the old empire was
already beginning to emerge. The people of Songhay dominated the middle areas of the
Niger valley. Traditionally, the society of Songhay was made up of “masters of the soil,”
that is, farmers and herders; and “masters of the waters,” or fishers. Songhay had begun
to form in the seventh century as an independent kingdom, perhaps under a Berber dy-
nasty. By 1010, a capital was established at Gao on the Niger River, and the rulers had be-
come Muslims, although the majority of the population remained pagan. Dominated by
Mali for a while, by the 1370s Songhay had established its independence again and began —
to thrive as new sources of gold from the West African forests began to pass through its
territory. Gao became a large city with a resident foreign merchant gommunity and sev-
eral mosques. Under a dynamic leader, Sunni Ali (r. 164-1492), the empire of Songhay
was forged.

. Sunni Ali was a great tactical commander and a ruthless leader. His cavalry ex-
panded the borders and seized the traditional trading cities of Timbuktu and Djenne. The
middle Niger valley fell under his control, and he developed a system of provincial ad-
ministration to mobilize recruits for the army and rule the far-flung conquests. Although
apparently a Muslim, he met any challenge to his authority, even when it came from the
Muslim scholars of Timbuktu, whom he persecuted. A line of Muslim rulers who took
the military title askia succeeded him. These rulers, especially Muhammad the Great;
extended the boundaries of the empire so that by the mid-sixteenth century Songhay:
dominated the central Sudan. |

Life in the Songhay Empire followed many of the patterns established in the previ?
ous savanna states. The fusion of Islamic and pagan populations and traditions contin"
ued. Muslim clerics and jurists sometimes were upset by the pagan beliefs and practices
that continued among the population, and even more by the local interpretation of
Islamic law. They wanted to impose a strict interpretation of the law of Islam and were
shocked that men and women mixed freely in the markets and streets, and that women
went unveiled.

--- End of Page 10 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 175

gnghay remained the dominant power in the region until the end of the sixteenth
In 1591, a Muslim army from Morocco, equipped with muskets, crossed the
nd defeated the vastly larger forces of Songhay. This sign of weakness stimu-
ternal revolts against the ruling family, and eventually the parts of the old empire

ay.
ie demise of the Songhay imperial structure did not mean the end of the political
tural tradition of the Western Sudan. Other states that combined Muslim and pa-
ditions rose among the Hausa peoples of Northern Nigeria, based on cities such Hausa
o and Katsina. The earliest Muslim ruler of Kano took control in the late four- _ Peoples of present-day Northen
century and turned the city into a center of Muslim learning. In Kano and.other _ Nigeria; formed states following
cities of the region, an urbanized royal court in a fortified capital ruled over the _ the demise of Songhay Empire
tic villages, where the majority of the population lived. With powerful cavalry that combined Muslim and
ses these states extended their rule and protected their active trade in salt, grains, and Pagan traditions.
q Although these later Islamicized African states tended to be small, and their goals
local, they reproduced many of the social, political, and religious forms of the great
es of the grasslands..
Be yond the Sudan, Muslim penetration came in various forms. Merchants became es-
ed in most of the major trading cities, and religious communities developed in each

ies, occupational groups, free people, and slaves. Intermarriage often took place, but
m-influence varied widely from region to region. Nevertheless, families of traders
eages that became known as specialists in Muslim law spread widely through

2 5° Political and Social Life in the Sudanic States

can generalize from these brief descriptions of Mali and Songhay about the nature
the Sudanic states. The village communities, clans, and various ethnic groups contin-

up and often of a dominant family. Many states pointed to the immigrant origins of
tuling families, and in reality the movement and fusion of populations were constant
ures in the Sudan. Islam provided a universalistic faith that served the interests of
Ay groups. Common religion and law provided solidarity and trust to the therchants
6 lived in the cities and whose caravans brought goods to and from the savanna. The
g families used Islamic titles, such as emir or caliph, to reinforce their authority, and
) surrounded themselves with literate Muslim advisors and scribes, who aided in
ernment administration. The Muslim concept of a ruler who united civil and reli-
authority reinforced traditional ideas of kingship. It is also important to note that
Africa, as elsewhere in the world, the formation of states heightened social differences
‘made these societies more hierarchical.

Jn all the Sudanic states, Islam was fused with the existing traditions and beliefs.
ship and authority were still based on the ability to intercede with local spirits, and
ugh Sundiata and Sunni Ali were nominally Muslim, they did not ignore the tradi-
Nal basis of their rule. For this reason, Islam in these early stages in the Sudan tended
ccommodate pagan practice and belief. Large proportions of the populations-of Mali
Songhay never converted to Islam, and those who did convert often maintained
Y of the old beliefs as well. .

--- End of Page 11 ---
1/6 Part Il: The Mongot Age, 1200-1450

We can See this fusion of traditions clearly in the position of women. Several Sudani
societies were matrilineal, and some recognized the role of women within the lines 4

Sharia kinship, contrdfy to the normal patrilineal customs inscribed in the Sharia, or Islamj
[sha rEE 4] Islamic law; defined, _ law. As in the case of Songhay, North African visitors to the Sudan were shocked by
among other things, the easy familiarity between men and women and the freedom enjoyed by women.
patrilineal nature of Islamic Finally, slavery and the slave trade between Black Africa and the rest of the Islam
inheritance. world had a major impact on women and children in these societies. Various forms

slavery and dependent labor had existed in Africa before Islam was introduced. Althou
we know little about slavery in Central Africa in this period, slavery had been a margi
aspect of the Sudanic states. Africans had been enslaved by others before, and Nubi
(African) slaves had been known in the classical world, but with the Muslim conquest
of North Africa and commercial penetration to the south, slavery became a more wid
diffused phenomenon, and a slave trade in Africans developed on a new scale.

In theory, Muslims viewed slavery as a stage in the process of conversion—a way
preparing pagans to become Muslims—but in reality, conversion did not guarantee free:
dom. Slaves in the Islamic world were used in a variety of occupations, as domestic ser.
vants and laborers, but they were also used as soldiers and administrators who, having
no local ties and affiliations, were considered to be dependent on and thus trustworth
by their masters. Slaves were also used as eunuchs and concubines, hence the emphasi
on enslaving women and children. The trade caravans from the Sahel across the Sahar;
often transported slaves as well as gold, and as we shall see, other slave trade routes de-
veloped from the African interior to the East African coast.

Frequently the children of slave mothers were freed and integrated into Muslim
society. Although this custom was positive in one sense, it also meant a constant des
mand for more slaves to replace those who had been freed. Estimates of the volume of
the trans-Saharan slave trade vary widely. One scholar places the total at 4.8 million,
with another 2.4 million sent to the Muslim ports on the Indian Ocean coast. Actual)
figures may have been considerably lower, but the trade extended over 700 years and
affected a large area. It was one more way in which Islamic civilization changed sub-

Saharan Africa.

Visualizing the Past
The Architecture of Faith

The spread of Islam eventually created spiritual,
commercial, and cultural bonds between West Africa and
the Middle East and especially between North Africa and
Spain. The process of Islam’s expansion and its local
adaptation is apparent in the distinctive architectural
style of West African mosques. Built usually -of clay,
incorporating wood beams for support and decoration,
with a mirab tower and an open courtyard, these places
of worship created spaces of simple elegance with local
materials that reflect ethnic and regional differences. West
African mosques vary considerably from the traditional
patterns of the Middle East and South Asia. Mosques,
like the simple buildings among the Dogon people or the
elaborate Sankoré mosque at Timbuktu begun in 1324 by
Mansa Musa and later the center of a university, reflect the
integration of Islam into African life.

Dogon village mosque in Kani-Kombole, Mali, West Africa.

Bombaert Patrick/Alamy Stock Photo


--- End of Page 12 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 177

Review Questions:

1. The architectural styles of West African mosques differ
from the classic models of the Middle East. In what way
does that suggest that Islam’s entry to the region was
gradual and transmitted by merchants and traders?

2. In what ways do the mosques of West Africa reflect local
conditions and practices?

3. What functions beside prayer did mosques play, and how
did their construction tie West Africa to the wider world?

D had Middle Eastern mosques shown in the skyline of Yazd, Iran.

igor Alyukov/Shutterstock

a

3 The Swahili Coast of East Africa

y integrated into international commerce were the cities of East Africa, and why?

the thirteenth century, a string of urbanized East African trading ports had developed
g thie coast. These towns shared the common Bantu-based and Arabic-influenced
‘which means “coastal”) language and other cultural traits, although they were
ed by separate Muslim ruling families. Towns’such as Mogadishu, Mombasa, Ma-
Kilwa, Pate, and Zanzibar eventually contained mosques, tombs, and palaces of cut
and coral. Ivory, gold, iron, slaves, and exotic animals were exported from these
is in exchange for silks from Persia and porcelain.from China for the ruling Muslim
ilies. The Arab traveler Ibn Battuta was impressed with the beauty and refinement
hese towns. He described Kilwa as “one of the most beautiful and ‘well constructed
ns in the world” and was also impressed by the pomp and luxury of its ruler. Kilwa’s
antage was its access to the gold coming from the interior and the fact that it was the
Hthest point south from which the ships sailing from India could hope to return in a
igle Monsoon season.
From the thirteenth to the fifteenth centuries, Kilwa flourished in the context of in-
National trade, but it was not alone; about 30 of these port towns eventually dotted the
(Map 7.2). They were tied to each other by an active coastal commerce and, in a few
ces, to the interior by a caravan trade, although it was usually Africans who brought
00ds to the coast. Some Chinese ports sent goods directly to Africa in the thirteenth
Mury, and as late as 1417 and 1431, large state-sponsored expeditions sailing directly
m China stopped at the East African coast to load ivory,-gold, and rare woods. The
‘inese discontinued such contact after 1431, and goods.from China came-to the coast
reafter in the ships of Arab or Indian traders.

3.1 The Mixture of Cultures on the Swahili Coast

© Islamic influence in these towns promoted long-distance commerce. The thirteenth
“ury was a period of great Islamic expansion, and as that faith spread eastward to India
4 Indonesia, it provided a religious bond of trust and law that facilitated trade through-
ports of the Indian Ocean. The ruling families in the East African trading ports built
*ques and palaces; the mosque at Mogadishu was begun in, 1231. Many of these ruling
es claimed to be descendants of immigrants from Shiraz, in Persia—a claim intended
legitimize their position and orthodoxy. In fact, some evidence indicates that the original

--- End of Page 13 ---
178 Part li: The Mongoi Age, 1200-1450

Map 7.2 THE SWAHILI COAST; AFRICAN MONSOON

ROUTES AND MAJOR TRADE ROUTES

(Fieenge
se Riogdetishu
5, \%/ Barawa
i

INDIAN
OCEAN

igeat®

5S

As important as the Islamic impact was on the societies of the savanna and the East
African coast, other African peoples in the continent's interiér and in the forests of
West Africa were following their own trajectories of development. We must emphasize
that African societies were diverse. By 1000 c.8., most of these societies were based on

7.4 Peoples of the Forest and Plains

What kinds of political organization developed in Central and Southern Africa?

Muslim families had emigrated to the Somali coast ang
from there to other towns farther south. The institutions
and forms of the Muslim world operated in these cities,
Whereas the rulers and merchants tended to be Muslim, the
majority of the population on the East African coast, and
perhaps even in the towns themselves, retained their previ.
ous beliefs and culture.

African culture remained strong throughout the area,
Swahili was essentially a Bantu language containing a large
number of Arabic words, although many of these words
were not incorporated until the sixteenth century. The lan-
guage was written in an Arabic script some time before the -
thirteenth century; the ruling families could also converse
in Arabic. Islam itself penetrated very little into the inte.
rior among the hunters, pastoralists, and farmers. Even the
areas of the coast near the trading towns remained largely
unaffected. In the towns, the mud and thatch houses of the
non-Muslim common peoples surrounded the stone and
coral buildings of the Muslim elite. Islamization was to some
extent class-based. Still, a culture developed that fused Is-
lamic and traditional elements. For example, family lineage
was traced both through the maternal line, which controlled
property (the traditional African practice), and through the
paternal line, as was the Muslim custom. Swahili culture
was a dynamic hybrid, and the Swahili people spread their
Janguage and culture along the coast of East Africa.

By the time the Portuguese arrived on this coast
around 1500, the Swahili culture was widely diffused.
Kilwa was no longer the predominant city, and the fo-
cus of trade had shifted to Malindi and Mombasa on the
Kenya coast, but the commerce across the Indian Ocean
continued. Eventually, the Portuguese raided Kilwa and
Mombasa in an attempt to take control of trade. Their out-
post on Mozambique and their control of Sofala put much
of the gold trade in their hands. Although the Portuguese
built a major outpost at Fort Jesus in Mombasa in 1592,
they were never able to control the trade on the Northern
Swahili coast. The East African patterns, as established by
1500, persisted even more than those of the Sudanic king-
doms. In some areas like the Swahili coast and the West
African savanna, Islam became a dominant cultural force.
In other areas such as the forest region of West Africa,
Muslims remained a minority, and in other areas like the
Central African forests, Islam hardly penetrated at all.


--- End of Page 14 ---
Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 179

ried agriculture, sometimes combined with herding, and
{societies used iron tools and weapons. Many were still
nized in small village communities. In various places,
eryer, states had formed. Some of them began to resolve the
slems of integrating large territories under a single govern-
tand ruling subject peoples. Whereas Egypt, Kush, and
pia had developed writing, and other areas borrowed
Arabic script, many sub-Saharan African societies were
Hterate and transmitted their knowledge, skills, and tradi-
yy oral methods and direct instruction. The presence or
of writing has often been used as a measure of civiliza-
-by Western observers, but as in pre-Columbian Peru, var-
; African societies made great strides in the arts, building,
statecraft, sometimes in the context of highly urbanized
s, without a system of writing. .
cross Central Africa, kingdoms developed that were sup-
by complex agratian societies capable of great artistic
ievements. At Benin, in the Kongo, in the Yoruba city-
s, and at Great Zimbabwe, royal authority—often consid-
divinely inspired—ted to the creation of powerful states

sure 7.3).

Figure 7.3

{1 Artists and Kings: Yoruba
Benin

Yoruba peoples, who spoke a non-Bantu language, were or-
ed in small city-states, each controlling a radius of perhaps
s. The Yoruba were highly urbanized, although many
e town inhabitants farmed in the surrounding country-
These city-states developed under the strong authority of
kings, who were considered divine. A vast royal court
included secondary wives, musicians, magicians, and body-

of soldier-slaves surrounded the king. His rule was not _Cfowned head of a member of a ruling family of Ife, in present-
, however. We can use the example of the Yoruba state of day Nigeria, sculpted of metal in the fourteenth or early fifteenth
9, which had emerged by the fourteenth century. Its king, the century. Ife was a city-state formed by the Yoruba people.

drawn from local lineages, who were allowed to exercise
ditional rule as long as they continued to pay tribute to Oyo. In the capital, a council
te, made up of nobles from the seven city districts, advised the ruler and limited his
ver, and the Ogboni, or secret society of religious and political leaders, reviewed deci-
of the king and the council. The union of civil and supernatural powers in the person
he ruler was the basis of power. The highly urbanized nature of Yoruba society and the
ishing of artisan traditions within these towns bear some similarity to those of the city-
fes of medieval Italy or Germany. The remarkable terra-cotta and bronze portrait heads
past rulers were produced in the period after 1200 c.z. by Yoruba artists; their lifelike
ality and the skill of their execution are among the greatest achievements of African art.
Patterns similar to those in the Yoruba city-states could be found among Edo peoples
the east of Yoruba. A large city-state called Benin was formed sometime in the four-
et uth century. Under Ewuare the Great (r. 1440-1473), Benin’s control extended from the
et River to the coast near modern Lagos. Benin City was described by early European
tors in the sixteenth century as a city of great population and broad ayenues. The oba,
ler, lived in a large royal compound surrounded by a great entourage, and his au-
ity was buttressed by ritual and ceremony.

aw ive/Briti i
fin, contr : at in - _ Werner Forman Archive/British Museum, London/Heritage Image
n, ‘olled subject peoples through “princes” in the prov: Partnership Ltd/Alamy Stock Phote

Benin

Powerful city-state (in present-
day Nigeria) that came into
contact with-the Portuguese in
1485 but remained relatively
free of European influence;
important commercial and
political entity until the
nineteenth century.

--- End of Page 15 ---
180 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Thinking Historically

Two Transitions in the History of World Population

Africa and the ancient Americas are two regions that make
clear the difficulty of establishing the past size and structure
of populations. Estimates based on fragmentary sources,
the amount of available resources, and analysis of agricultural
or hunting techniques have been used as rough guesses
about population size. The results often are inadequate
or controversial, but historians believe that the question
is important. Demography, the. study of population, has
increasingly become a valued tool of historical inquiry. Clearly,
unless we know the size, density, age structure, health,
and reproductive capacity of a population, it is difficult to
understand many aspects of its society, politics, and economy.
In the contemporary world, most nations conduct periodic
censuses to assess the present situation of their populations
and to plan for the future. Before the mid-eighteenth
century, when census-taking became a regular procedure,
population estimates and counts were sporadic and usually
inaccurate. Estimating populations in the past, especially in
nonliterate societies, is a highly speculative exercise in which
archeological evidence and estimates of productive capacity
of agricultural practices and technology are used. The earliest
date for a population estimate with a margin of error less than
20 percent is probably 1750.

The history of human demography can be divided into.

two basic periods: a long era—almost all of human history—
of very slow growth and a very short period—about 275
years, from 1750 to the present—of very rapid growth. For
most of this history, the human population was very small
and grew very slowly. Before agriculture was developed, the
hunting-and-gathering economies of the world’s populations
supported 5 million to 10 million people, if modern studies
of such populations can be used as a guide. After about
8000 B.c.c., when plants and animals were domesticated,
there was a first demographic transition as population
began to increase more rapidly but still at a modest level.
Agriculture provided a more secure and larger food supply,
but population concentration in villages and towns may have
made people more susceptible to disease and thus reduced
their numbers. Other historians believe that the settled
agricultural life also led to intensified warfare (because
of the struggle for land and water) and increasing social
stratification within societies.

Still, the Neolithic Revolution and the development of
agriculture stimulated population growth. It was the first
major transition in the history of world population. One
estimate, based on Roman and Chinese population counts
and some informed guesses about the rest of the world, is
an annual growth rate of about 0.36 per million. By 1 c.£., the

, often is associated with the Industrial Revolution, when new

.France, these two transitions took place at about the same

world population may have been about 300 million peopte. |
increased between 1 ¢.£. and 1750 c.£. to about 500 millio
people. We should bear in mind that during this period
general increase, there were always areas that suffer
decline—sometimes drastic—because of wars, epidemics
or natural catastrophes. The disastrous decline of Ameri
Indian populations after contact with Europeans, caused b
disease, conquest, and social disruption, is a case in point
The effect of the slave trade on Africa, although still debated,
is another. Sharp population changes usually resulted j
profound social and cultural adjustments. Some scholars
argue that the slave trade had just such an impact on soci
and political patterns in Africa.

A second and extremely important transition tool
place between the mid-seventeenth and the mid-eighteenth
centuries. Initially based on new food resources, this transition

sources of energy were harnessed. The growth rate greatly
increased during this period in the countries most affected)
Between 1750 and 1800, the world population grew at a rate
of more than 4 percent a year to more than a billion people. B
the mid-twentieth century, the world growth rate had tripled,
and by 2012, the world population had risen to more than
billion. }

This demographic transition took place first in Europ
and is still more characteristic of the developed world. Most
premodern agrarian economies were characterized by. 4@
balance between the annual number of births and deaths;
both were high. Life expectancy usually was less than 35
years, and the high mortality was compensated by high
fertility; that is, women had many ctildren. Improvements in
medicine, hygiene, diet, and the’ general standard of living
contributed to a decrease in mortality in the eighteerith
century. This allowed populations to begin to grow at a faster
rate. By the nineteenth century in most of Western Europe,
the decline in mortality was followed by a decline in ferti ity
brought about by contraception. In some countries such as

time, so population growth was limited. In much of Europe,
however, the decline in fertility lagged behind the decrease in
mortality, so there was a period of rapid population growth.
Until the 1920s, population growth in Western Europe and
the United States was higher than in the rest of the world,
especially in the less industrialized countries. In recent times,
that situation has been reversed. But many other societies
have now experienced a demographic. transition.

Some demographers believe that demographic transition
is part of the process of shifting from a basically agrarian society

--- End of Page 16 ---
t 5 an industrial, urbanized one and that the improvements
PR redicine, technology, and higher standards of living will
secessarily result in a change to a modern demographic
structure. They believe that a decreasing need for children as
of the family economic unit, laws against child labor, and
intervention in family planning will eventually lower the
yorid birth rate and decrease the pressure of population on
conomic growth. This assumption remains to be proved, and
fesponses may vary greatly from one region of the world to
snother because of economic conditions and cultural attitudes
about proper family size.

Finally, we should also note that responses to
ographic transition can vary greatly according, to historical
conditions. in the eighteenth and nineteenth
enturies, Europe resolved the problem of

may indicate that the process is continuing.

- Still, it is clear that a demographic
transition is well advanced in many parts of Latin America
and Asia and is beginning to take hold in Africa. Mortality
las dropped very rapidly since 1950 because of moderh

‘a single example, in Sri Lanka the mortality rate was almost
gt in half between 1945 and 1952 simply by eliniinating

in Asia and Latin Ametica, but in Africa, where’ children
continue to have an important economic and social role in the
extended family, it remains high. It is difficult to project what
demographic transitions will take place in these areas of the
world. However, all countries are faced with the problem of

At present, the world’s

medical technology, and life expectancy has doubled. To cite

malarial mosquitoes. Fertility has declined in many places.

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 181

balancing their population’s growth against the ability of the
society to feed and provide an adequate standard of living to
the people.

At present, the world’s population is growing because
of a moderate rate of growth in the industrialized nations
and a high rate in the developing countries. In the 1970s,
demographer Ansley Coale pointed out that the rate of
growth, about 2 percent a year, is 100 times greater than it
had been for most of human history. At this ‘rate the world’s
population would be multiplied by 1,000 every 350 years. The
results of such growth would be disastrous. Coale concluded
that the present period of growth is transitory. Some people
who are concerned with rapid Population growth believe
that the solution is to limit’ population
growth in the developing nations by state

opulation growth with an, enormous wave Population is growing intervention, like China’s policy of limiting
of emigration to the Americas, Australia, because of a moderate the number of children per family or
and_ various colonies around the globe. rate of growth in the through incentives to have smaller families
?P resent-day political circumstances make industrialized nations and education about birth control. Others
this solution less possible, although thenew anda high rate in the believe that a redistribution of resources
waves of migration in the global economy developing countries. from rich nations to poor nations would

alleviate the human misery created by
population pressure and eventually lead
to political and social conditions that would contribute to a
gradual lowering of the birth rates. Clearly, demographic
questions must always be set in political, economic, and
social contexts.

Review Questions:
1. Why do nations differ in their need to contro! population
growth?
2. Why has the rate of population growth varied in different
areas of the world?
3. Is overpopulation essentially a biological, social, or
political problem?

“ sohtact with outsiders (Figure 7.4).

at authority was also the theme of the magnificent artistic output in ivory and cast
ize that became characteristic of Benin. Celebration of the powers and majesty of the
al lineage as well as objects for the rituals surrounding kingship were the stibjects of
of this art. When the first Europeans, the Portuguese, visited Benin in the 1480s,
y were impressed by the power of the ruler and the extent of his territory. Similarly,
Partists of Benin were impressed with the Portuguese, and Benin bronzes and ivories
to include representations of Portuguese soldiers and other themes that reflected

demography
The study of population.

demographic transition

Shift to low birth rate, low infant
death rate, stable population;
first emerged in Western Europe
and the United States in the late
nineteenth century.

42 The Kingdoms of Kongo and Mwene Mutapa

antu migrations discussed in Chapter 2 had brought millions of farming and herd-
ples into Central and Southern Africa from their original homelands in Nigeria. In
us places they replaced kinship-based societies with new political structures based
Singship supported by ideas of hereditary royal lineages and a Kind of bureaucracy.
Me of these became powerful states. Beginning about the thirteenth century, another


--- End of Page 17 ---
182 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 7.4

kingdom was forming on the lower Congo River. By the
late fifteenth century this kingdom, Kongo, was flour
ishing. On a firm agricultural base, its people also de.
veloped the skills of weaving, pottery, blacksmithing
and carving. Individual artisans, skilled in the working
of wood, copper, and iron, were highly esteemed. There
was a sharp division of labor between men and women
Men took responsibility for clearing the forest and scrub,
producing palm oil and palm wine, building houses,
hunting, and long-distance trade. Women took chatge
of cultivation in all its aspects, the care of domestic an-
imals, and household duties. On the seacoast, women
made salt from seawater, and they also collected the
seashells that served as currency in the Kongo kingdom,
The population was distributed in small family-based
villages and in towns. The area around the capital,
Mbanza Kongo, had a population of 60,000 to 100,000 by
the early sixteenth century.

The kingship of the Kongo was hereditary but local
chieftainships were not, and this gave the central author-
ity power to control subordinates. In a way, the Kongo
kingdom was a confederation of smaller states brought
under the control of the manikongo, or king, and by the
fifteenth century it was divided into eight major prov-
inces. The word mani means “blacksmith,” and it demon-
strated the importance of iron and the art of working it

Bronze plaque of Oba and retainers. African rulers often negotiated with
the Portuguese on equal terms and incorporated them into local political
and commercial networks. In this plaque, the presence of Portuguese

retainers—the helmeted figures armed with muskets on each side of the

in its association with political and ritual power.

Farther to the east, another large Bantu confedera-
tion developed among the farming and cattle-herding
Shona-speaking peoples in the region between the

main figure’s head—were marks of the Oba's power.

Zambezi and Limpopo rivers. Beginning in the ninth

Werner Forman Archive/Museum fur Volkerkunde, Berlin/Heritage Image Partnership

Ltd/Alamy Stock Photo

Kongo

Kingdom, based on agriculture,
formed on lower Congo River by
late fifteenth century; capital
at Mbanza Kongo; ruled by
hereditary monarchy.

Great Zimbabwe

Bantu confederation of Shona-
speaking peoples located
between the Zambezi and
Limpopo rivers; developed after
ninth century; featured royal
courts built of stone; created
centralized state by fifteenth
century; king took title of
Mwene Mutapa.

century C.z., migrants from the west began to build
royal courts in stone, to which later immigrants added
more polished constructions. There were many of these
zimbabwe, or stone house, sites (about 200 have been found) that housed local rulers and
subchiefs, but the largest site, called Great Zimbabwe, was truly impressive (Figure 7.5).
It was the center of the kirigdom and had a religious importance, associated with the bird
of God, an eagle that served as a link between the world and the spirits. The symbol of the
bird of God is found at the ruins of Great Zimbabwe and throughout the area of its con-
trol. Great Zimbabwe (not to be confused with the modem nation of Zimbabwe) included
several structures, some with strong stone walls 15 feet thick and 30 feet high, a large con
ical tower, and extensive cut-stone architecture made without the use of mortar to join the
bricks together. Observers in the nineteenth century suspected that Phoenicians or Arabs
had built these structures, mostly because their prejudices prevented them from believing
that Africans were capable of erecting such buildings, but archeologists have established
that a Bantu kingdom had begun construction in stone by the eleventh century c.z. and
had done its most sophisticated building in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.

By the fifteenth century, a centralized state ruled from Great :Zimbabwe had begun
to form. It controlled a large portion of the interior of Southeast Africa all the way to the
Indian Ocean. Under a king who took the title Mwene Mutapa (which the Portuguese latet
pronounced “Monomotapa”), this kingdom experienced a’short period of rapid expan-
sion in the late fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Its dominance over the sources of gold
in the interior eventually gave it great advantages in commerce, which it developed with


--- End of Page 18 ---
: celain unearthed by archeologists at Great Zimbabwe. By the sixteenth century, inter-
il divisions and rebellion had split the kingdom apart, and perhaps an emphasis on cat-
as a symbol of wealth led to soil exhaustion. Control of the gold fields still provided a

ce of power and trade. Representatives of the Mwene Mutapa called.at the east coast
to buy Indian textiles, and their regal bearing and fine iron weapons impressed the

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 183

Figure 7.5

Great Zimbabwe was one of several
stone settlement complexes in
Southeastern Africa. Added to at
different times, it served as the
royal court of the kingdom. in

their search for traces of the non-
African peopie they believed “must”
have built these massive stone
structures, European explorers

and treasure-seekers stripped the
site of layers of artifacts that might
have told more of the story of Great
Zimbabwe.

Nick Greaves/Images of Africa
Photobank/Alamy Stock Photo

Europeans who saw them. As late as the nineteenth century, a much smaller king-
of Mwene Mutapa survived in the interior and provided some leadership against
uopean encroachment, but pastoralism had come to play a central role in the lives of

‘Shona people who descended from the great tradition.

q

" Developments in sub-Saharan Africa during the centuries
after 1200 featured a mixture of internal changes, including
_ the spread of strong states in several regions, along with the
~ ifitensification of contacts, particularly with North Africa and
the Middle East. Contacts did not extend, however, to direct
interactions with the Mongols: In this respect African history
after 1200 differed from patterns in much of Asia and Europe,
Where the Mongols and their impact had such profound
" effects. African products did reach the Mongols—for exampie,
through the export of decorative feathers—but only through
the efforts of Arab traders. Africans themselves were not
involved and were not challenged to reconsider their military
fe. and political patterns or their commercial outreach, to the
_ Same extent as Asia or Europe.

This chapter has concentrated on the Sudanic states
and the Swahili coast, where the impact of Islam was the

Global Connections and Central Themes
5 Internal Development and Global Contacts

most profound and where, because of the existence of
written sources, it is somewhat easier to reconstruct the
region’s history. Sub-Saharan Africa had never been totally
isolated fron the Mediterranean world or other outside
contacts, but the spread of Islam obviously brought large
areas of Africa into more intensive contact with the global
community, even though Africa remained something of an .
Islamic frontier. Still, the fusion of Islamic and indigenous
African cultures created a synthesis that restructured the
life of many Africans. Sudanic kingdoms and the Swahili
coast participated in extensive borrowing and interactions
with North Africa and the Middle East, similar to imitation
efforts by several other societies in the postclassical period.
Islamic contacts were also heavily involved in the growing
integration of several parts of sub-Saharan Africa with
global.trade.


--- End of Page 19 ---
184 Part li: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Although the arrival of Islam in Africa in the period from
800 to 1500 was clearly a major event, it would be wrong to
see Africa's history in this period exclusively in terms of the
Islamic impact. Great Zimbabwe and the Kongo kingdom,
to cite only two examples, represented the development of
Bantu concepts of kingship and state-building independently
of trends taking place elsewhere on the continent. Similar
processes and accomplishments could also be seen in
Benin and among the Yoruba of West Africa. Meanwhile in

Ethiopia, East Africa, and the Eastern Sudan, the impact of -

Christianity and the pre-Islamic Mediterranean world had been
long felt. The dynamic relationship between the impact of the
civilizations and peoples external to Afrida and the processes
ot development within the continent itself was a major theme
in Africa’s history.
Developments in Africa had their own special chara-
* teristics, and of course quite varied patterns emerged. The
Sudanic kingdoms, however, warrant particular comparison
with several other regions during the postclassical pertod. They
showed the capacity to organize large, although fairly loosely
structured, states, They expanded trade and cultural contacts

with other civilization centers, particularly in North Africa
and the Middle East. They imitated aspects of their contag
societies, though quite selectively. They clearly formed a vita,
part of the expansion of transregional trade, while constructing
their own reactions to the other great theme of the period, the
spread of world religions.

: By the late fifteenth century, when the first European,
the Portuguese, began to arrive on the west and east coa
of Africa, in many places they found well-developed, powerfyj
kingdoms that were able to deal with the Portuguese as equals
This was even truer in the parts of Africa that had come under
the influence of Islam and through it had established links
with other areas of Muslim civilization. In this period, Africa
had increasingly become part of the general cultural trends of
the wider world. Moreover, the intensified export trade in ivory,
slaves, and especially gold from Africa drew Africans, even)
those far from the centers of trade, into a widening network of
global relations. With the arrival of Europeans in sub-Saharan,
Africa in the late fifteenth century, the pace and intensity of the
cultural and commercial contacts became even greater, and

many African societies faced new and profound challenges.
2

Further Readings

$
Several books are useful in relation to this chapter. The pe-
riod covered is summarized in Robert O. Collins and James
M. Burns, A History of Sub-Saharan Africa (2007). Essential ~
reading on Central Africa is Jan Vansina, Paths in the Rain-
forests (1990) and his How Societies Are Born: Governance in
West Central Africa (2004). A general introduction to the
grassland empires of the Western Sudan is presented in
David Conrad, Empires of Medieval West Africa (2005), while
Michael Gomez, African Dominion: A New History of Empire in
Early and Medieval West Africa (2018) provides an overview
of the empires of the Western Sudan. On the Swahili coast,
see A. Mazrui and I. Shariff, The Swahili: Idiom and Identity
of an African People (1994) which emphasizes ‘language;
and R. L..Pouwells, Horn and Crescent: Cultural Change and
Traditional Islam on the East African Coast, 800-1900, 2nd
ed. (2002). John Middleton, The World of the Swahili (1992)
Mark Horton and John Middleton, The Swahili: The Social
Landscape of a Mercantile Society (2000), and Chapurukha
Kusimba, The Rise and Fall of Swahili City States (1999) are
all good introductions to the topic. On Ethiopia, see Harold
Marcus, A History of Ethiopia (1994). Stuart Munro-Hay, The
Quest for the Ark of the Covenant (2005) delves into the Judaic
and Christian origins of Ethiopia. A very good survey of
the early history of Africa with interesting comments on
the Nok culture is Susan Keech McIntosh and Roderick
J. McIntosh’s “From Stone to Metal: New Perspectives on
the Later Prehistory of West Africa,” Journal of World History
2, no. 1 (1988): 89-133. Graham Connah, Forgotten Africa:

An Introduction to Its Archaeology (2004) reveals recent find
ings in that field. J. R Ade Ajayi and Michael Crowder’s
History of West Africa, 2 vols. (1987) contains excellent re-
view chapters by specialists. N. Levtzion’s Ancient Ghani
and Mali (1973) is still the best short introduction to these
kingdoms of the Sahel, but more recent are David Robinson,
Muslim Societies in African History (2004), and the essays
collected in Nehemia Levtzion and Randall Pouwels, eds,
The History of Islam in Africa (2000).

Two good books on the Kengo kingdom are Anne
Hilton's The.Kingdom of the Kongo (1992), which shows how
African systems of thought accommodated the arrival of
Europeans and their culture, and Koen Bostoan and Inge
Brinkman, eds. The Kongo Kingdom: The Origins, Dynamics
and Cosmopolitan Culture of an African Polity (2018). Josepht
Vogel, Great Zimbabwe: The Iron Age in South Central Africa
(2004). is a good starting point, David Birmingham and
Phyllis Martin’s History of Central Africa, 2 vols. (1983) is a
excellent regional history.

Two multivolume general histories of Africa tha
provide synthetic articles by leading scholars on many
of the topics discussed in this chapter are The Cambridge
History of Africa, 8 vols. (1975-1986); and the UNESCO:
General History of Africa, 7 vols. to date (1981-).

Some important source materials on African history
for this period include three translations of the Mandé
epic Sundiata: David C. Conrad and Djanta Tassey Conde’s
Sunjata: A West African Epic of the Mande Peoples (2004)

--- End of Page 20 ---
T Niane’s Sundiata: An Epic of Old Mali (1986); and Bamba
o and Banna Kanute, Sunjata: Gambian Versions of the
Epic (2000). Other sources include G. R. Crone, ed.,

Voyages of Cadamosto, 2nd series, vol. 80 (1937), which
Js with Mali, Cape Verde, Senegal, and Benin; Maylin
witt, ed., The Portuguese in West Africa 1415-1670 (2010);

What were the products of Africa that attracted inter-
national trade, and what did Africans want in return?

Chapter 7: African Civilizations and the Spread of Islam 185

and Ross Dunn’s indispensable edition of The Adventures
of Ibn Battuta: A Muslim Traveler of the 14th Century (1990).
Arab sources are translated in Nehemia Levtzion and Jay
Spaulding, Medieval West Africa: Views from Arab Scholars
and Merchants (2003).

Critical Thinking Questions

3. Compare the advantages and disadvantages of politi-
cally decentralized societies with those that had mon-
archies or other forms of hereditary rule.

4

--- End of Page 21 ---
.Postclassical Mesoamerica, 1000-1500 C.E.
What were the main features of the Toltec and Aztec empires?

Aztec Religious and Economic Structure
What were the main characteristics of Aztec society?

3 Aztec Society in Transition
_ What were the principal strengths and constraints of the Aztec
economy and social structure? .
84 Twantinsuyu: World of the Incas
_ What were the principal-causes of the expansion of the Inca Empire?

8.5 The Other Peoples of the Americas

__ What were the characteristic economic forms of American groups
_ outside the two great imperial territories?

Figure 8.1

The great Aztec city-state of
Tenochtitlan was established on
an island in the midst of a large
fake. Connected to the shores by
causeways and supplied with fresh
water by an aqueduct, it housed

a population estimated to be over
150,000. Early Spanish observers
compared its canals to Venice and
were fascinated by its markets
and gardens. To the Aztecs it was
the center of political and spiritual
power, or as they called it, “the
foundation of heaven.”

Island Capital of the Aztecs, Tenochtitlan
(mural), Covarrubias, Luis (1919-1987)/
Museo Nacional de Antropologia, Mexico
City, Mexico/Sean Sprague/Mexicolore/
Bridgeman Images

187

--- End of Page 1 ---
488 Part il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450 :
i
IF YOU CLIMBED THE STEEP STAIRWAY to the temple at its summit and looked out fron,
atop the great pyramid at its center, you could see that the splendid city of Tenochtitlay, Bs

capital of the Aztec Empire, rose from two islands in a large lake (Figure 8.1). All aroung —
its shores were densely settled towns and cities surrounded by cultivated fields. Canogs _ by]
constantly traversed the lake and entered the city through a maze of canals, large crowds _ The
trod across the causeways that linked the city and its markets to the shores, and in some - a
marshy areas, complex farming on “floating gardens” kept thousands of peasants at work: thai
The Mexica or Tenochca people (sometimes called the Aztecs) who built the city consid. r peo
ered it “the foundation of Heaven.” For them it was a sacred space as well as a thriving — ug
metropolis and the heart of their empire. ; Hl A
When the first Europeans saw Tenochtitlan in 1520, the city had a population of over —

150,000 and covered about 5 square miles, making it as large as contemporary Seville peo

waj

or Paris. The first Europeans who saw it were amazed. Some of them compared the city |
and its canals to Venice. Hernan Cortés, the Spanish captain who first entered the city,
reported that “the stone masonry and the woodwork are equally good; they could not
be bettered anywhere.” His companion, the foot soldier Bernal Diaz del Castillo, a man

usually given to plain speech, could not hide his admiration:

Gazing on such wonderful sights, we did not know what to say, or whether what
appeared before us was real, for on one side, on the land, there were great cities, and in
the lake ever many more, and the lake was crowded with canoes, and in the causeway
were many bridges at intervals, and in front of us stood the great city of Mexico.

Diaz del Castillo went on to describe the palaces and temples, the two-storied homes
of the nobles, the stuccoed buildings hung with garlands of flowers, the smell of the cedar
wood beams, the zoo, the aviary, the rooftop gardens, and the bustling markets filled
with everything from chocolate to elaborate textiles and from parrot feathers to precious
stones and slaves. The hum of the crowd in the great market, he said, could be heard

eee Re

miles away. Of course, there was much about the city that he did not understand, such — a
as the fact that each city ward was controlled by a kin group that cared for its temples; _
shrines, and palaces. Later, he came to understand that the purpose of temples was for.
ceremonies of human sacrifice, which he found appalling, but his overall impression was
one of admiration and wonder. i

Tenochtitlan, clearly a great urban center, was the largest of about 50 such city-states f
that dotted central and southern Mexico. They were the heirs of the long development of
civilization in the Americas, a process that seems to have taken place in relative isolation

from the other centers of world history.

The period from 1200 to 1450 saw many important developments in the Americas, par” Wh,
ticularly through the’ formation of great empires in Central America and the Andes— Afte
empires that can be compared to other ambitious states in the same period. But Americat enc
patterns were clearly distinctive in one respect: They occurred with no contact with’ the
societies in other parts of the world. They obviously were not influenced at all by the thes
great Mongol surge—like sub-Saharan Africa in this respect. But in contrast to Africa, the ado

ethi

Americas also had no other kinds of trading or cultural links with other civilizations
Afro-Eurasia. This isolation did not prevent great creativity in economic, cultural, and:


--- End of Page 2 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 189

_ political domains. But it would leave the region open to massive challenges when con-
tacts did begin to occur—after 1492,
By the mid-fifteenth century, the Americas were densely populated in many places
by peoples long, indigenous to the New World. These peoples were later called Indians. Indians
“="Fhat term of course, is derived.from-a mistake Columbus made when he thought he had misnomer created by Columbus
reached the Indies, what Europeans called India and the lands beyond, but the label is referring to indigenous peoples
also misleading because it implies a common identity among the peoples of the Americas _ of the New World; implies social
that did not exist until after the arrival of Europeans. Indian as a term to describe all the. - and: ethnic commonality among
-peoples of the Americas could have a meaning only when there were non-Indians from Dany series that did
which to distinguish them. Still, the term has been used for so long—and is stillin use Pt €x1st; still used to apply to
by many Native Americans today—that we will continue to use it along with the term Native Americans.
», Native Americans to describe the early peaples of the Americas.
As should already be clear, what we now call the Americas embraced many different
eoples with a vast array of cultural achievements. The variety of cultural patterns and
ways of life of pre-Columbian civilizations makes it impossible to discuss each in detail
here, but we can focus on a few areas where major civilizations developed, based on ear-
lier achievements. By concentrating on these regions, we can demonstrate the continuity
of civilization in the Americas. This chapter examines in some detail Mesoamerica, espe-
cially Central Mexico, and the Andean heartland. In both these areas great imperial states
were in place when European expansion brought them into direct contact with the Old
World. Discussed in less detail are a few areas influenced by the centers of civilization—
and some whose development seems to have been independent of them—to provide an
overview of the Americas on the eve of invasion.

1325

1471-1493
Fall cf Tula, Aztecs established in Central Mexico; | Inca Topac Yupanqui
disintegration of Tenochtitlan founded increases areas under
north coast of Peru Toltec Empire 1350 control
968 1200-1500 Incas established in Cuzco area 1493-1527
Tula established by Mississippian culture | 4494 Huayna Capac
‘Toltecs . flourishes Creation of tripie allianee in Mexico expands into Ecuador;
his death resutts in
ee 1434-1471 chal war
oltec conquest of Great expansion under Inca
Chichén itzé and Pachacuti 1502-1520
influence in Yucatan Reign of Mociezuma II
1434-1472.
Rule of Nezhualcoyot! at Texcoco
1438
Incas dominate Cuzco and southern
highlands
1440-1469 i
Reign of Moctezuma |.

8.1 Postclassical Mesoamerica,
1000-1500 c.z.

What were the main features of the Toltec and Aztec empires?

Afler the collapse by the great Mayan civilization before 900 ¢.z., Mesoamerica experi- Toltec culture
enced significant political and cultural change. In Central Mexico, nomadic peoples from Succeeded Teotihuacan culture
the north took advantage of the political vacuum to move into the richer lands. Among in Central Mexico; strongly I
these Peoples were the Toltecs, who established a capital at Tula about 968. Toltec culture militaristic ethic including

adopted many features from the sedentary peoples and added a strongly militaristic human sacrifice; influenced

ethic. This included the cult of sacrifice and war that is often portrayed in Toltec art and large territory after 1000 c.z,;

#] ., .
hat became a feature of Aztec society as well. Later Mesoamerican peoples, such as the declined after 1200 c.r.


--- End of Page 3 ---
190 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 8.2
Toltec political and cultural
influence spread from its capital at
Tula in Northern Mexico to places
as far south as Chichén Itza in
Yucatan. The colossal statues of
warriors shown here served as

~ columns that supported the roof of
a great temple.

Lukiyanova Natalia frenta/Shutterstock

Aztecs, had some historical memory of the Toltecs and thought of them as the givers
civilization. However, the archeological record indicates that Toltec accomplishments of
ten were fused or confused with even earlier societies, like the Mayans, in the memory of :
the Toltecs’ successors (Figure 8.2).

Toltec influence spread northward as well. Obsidian was mined in Northern Mexico, ;
and was probably traded for turquoise in the American Southwest. There are other ;
indications as well that the large settlements of the Mississippian culture that flourished
between 1200 and 1500 c.g. based on maize and bean agriculture probably had contacts
with Mesoamerica. Towns, usually located along rivers, had stepped temples made of _
earth, and sometimes large burial mounds. Some of the burial sites include well-produced _
pottery and other goods, and some burials seem to have been accompanied by ritual —
executions or sacrifices. All this indicates social stratification in the society. Cahokia, near —
East St. Louis, Illinois, covered 5 square miles and may have had more than 30,000 people
in and around its center. Its largest earthen pyramid, now called Monk’s Mound, covers
15 acres and is comparable in size to the largest pyramids of the classic period in Mexico.
Many of these cultural features seem to suggest contact with Mesoamerica.

8.1.1 The Aztec Rise to Power

The Toltec Empire lasted until about 1150, when it apparently was destroyed by nomadic
invaders from the north, who also seem to have sacked Tula about that time. The center
-of population and political power in Central Mexico shifted to the valley of Mexico and.
especially to the shores of the large chain of lakes in that basin. These provided a rich
aquatic environment. The shores of the lakes were dotted with settlements and towns
and supported a dense population. Of the approximately 3,000 square miles in the basin
of the valley, about 400 square miles were under water. The lakes became the cultural —
heartland and population center of Mexico in the postclassical period. In the unstable
world of post-Toltec Mesoamerica, various peoples and cities jockeyed for control of
the lakes. The winners of this struggle, the Aztecs—or, as they called themselves, the
Mexica—eventually built a great empire, but when they first emerged on the historical
scene, they were the most unlikely candidates for power.

The Aztec rise to power and formation of an imperial state was as spectacular as it
was rapid. According to some of their legends, the Mexica had once inhabited the central B


--- End of Page 4 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 191

valley and had known agriculture and the “civilized” life Map 8.1 CENTRAL MEX!

CO AND LAKE TEXCOCO

put had lived in exile to the north in a place called Aztlan
( ‘AZT-lahn) (from whence we get the name Aztec). This may
be an exaggeration by people who wanted to lay claim to
a distinguished heritage. Other sources indicate that the
Aztecs were simply one of the nomadic tribes that used the
political anarchy, after the fall of the Toltecs, to penetrate

the area of sedentary agricultural peoples. Like the ancient

|» Aztec city
‘| —— Aztec causeway

n

A re
|
o\ \ mexico { et

Area of map below NL
P pel a

we
PACIFIC OCEAN

We
a

Egyptians, the Aztecs rewrote history to suit their purposes.

What seems clear is that the Aztecs were a group of ay
900 peoplé who mi Res. g
about 10,000 people who migrated to the shores of Lake he a 9
Texcoco (Map 8.1) in the central valley of Mexico around Xalocen > Teotihuacdn, ©
1325. After the fall of the Toltec Empire, the central valley ahem
7 P spe : ~ &Chiccnautla
was inhabited by a mixture of peoples: Chichimec migrants % Tass

from the northwest and various groups of sedentary farm-
ers. In this period, the area around the lake was dominated
by several tribes or peoples organized into city-states. Much
like medieval Europe, this was a world of political maneu-
vers and state marriages, competing powers and shifting al-
Jiances. These political units claimed authority on the basis
of their military power and their connections to Toltec cul-
ture. Many of these peoples spoke Nahuatl (NAH-wahtl),
the language the Toltecs had spoken. The Aztecs also spoke

“pscap aloo, Oa? |
ST idoopan, +:

aie

ul

Itepect

this language, a fact that made their rise to power and their fo Lake 5 :
A , gh ¢ Xechimilco » Chalco pti
eventual claims to legitimacy more acceptable. AS, PO Pa E
An intrusive and militant group, the Aztecs were dis- ee? ergs es Chaled “Yo
trusted and disliked by the dominant powers of the area, ALL Sy ie ‘ ey
‘but their fighting skills could be put to use, and this made D €  DRLOMETERS «2+

fepeyacac Lake

Tlatelolco

enochtitlan -
‘de "
: Le
NE B

Culhuzedn 5

«Coatlinchan

Texcoco

hirnalhaued
Atenco ae

’.

= a
.
Lake pe

them attractive as mercenaries or allies. For about a century
the Aztecs wandered around the shores of the lake, being

This aquatic environment was the heart of the Aztec Empire.

allowed to settle for a while and then being driven out by
more powerful neighbors.

Ina period of warfare, the Aztecs had a reputation as tough warriors and fanatical
followers of their gods, to whom they offered human sacrifices. This reputation made
them both valued and feared. Their own legends held that their wanderings would end
when they saw an eagle perched on a cactus with a serpent in its beak. Supposedly, this
sign was seen on a marshy island in Lake Texcoco, and there, on that island and one
nearby, the Mexica settled. The city of Tenochtitlan was founded about 1325.

_. From this secure base the Aztecs began to take a more active role in regional politics.
“Serving as mercenaries and then as allies brought prosperity to the Aztecs, especially to
theirruler and the warrior nobles, who took lands aid tribute from conquered towns. By
1428, the Aztecs had emerged as an independent power. In 1434, Tenochtitlan created an
alliance with two other city-states that controlled much of the central plateau. In reality,
Tenochtitlan and the Aztecs dominated their allies and controlled the major share of the
_ uibute and lands taken.

8.1.2 The Aztec Social Contract

Aztec domination extended from the Tarascan frontier about 100 miles north of
Present-day Mexico City southward to the Maya area. Subject peoples were forced to pay
tibute, surrender lands, and sometimes do military service for the growing Aztec Empire.

Aztec society had changed in the process of expansion and conquest. From a loose
8sOciation of clans, the Mexica had become a stratified society under the authority of a

Tenochtitlan
[teh-nahk-teet-LAHN] Founded
¢, 1325 on marshy island in Lake
Texcoco; became center of Aztec
power; joined with Tlacopan and
Texcoco in 1434 to form a triple
alliance that controlled most of
central plateau of Mesoamerica.

--- End of Page 5 ---
192 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Tlaloc

[tlah-LOHK] Major god of Aztecs;
associated with fertility and the
agricultural cycle; god of rain.

Huitzilopochtli
[WEE-tsuh-loh-POHKT-lee] Aztec
tribal patron god; central figure
of cult of human sacrifice and
warfare; identified with old

sun god. :

supreme ruler. The histories were rewritten, and the Mexica were described as a People .
chosen to serve the gods. Human sacrifice, long a part of Mesoamerican religion, Steatly é'}
expanded into an enormous cult in which the military class played a central role as sup.
pliers of war captives to be used as sacrificial victims. A few territories were left uncon. _
quered so that periodic “flower wars” could be staged in which both sides could obtain
captives for sacrifice. Whatever the religious motivations of this cult, the Aztec rulerg
manipulated those motivations as an effective means of political terror. By the time of _
Moctezuma II, (1502-1520) the Aztec state was dominated by a king who representeg _
civil power and served as a representative of the gods on earth. The cult of human sacri.
fice and conquest was united with the political power of the ruler and the nobility. ;

8.2 Aztec Religious and Economic
Structure

What were the main characteristics of Aztec society?

The Aztecs utilized many of the cultural and economic features they inherited from ear-: ;
lier societies in the region. But they added important new elements, including a more :
militaristic cultural tone and, in agriculture, a variety of new techniques. Aztec achieve-
ments were ail the more remarkable as they continued to work within an essentially —
Neolithic technological framework.

8.2.1 Religion and the Ideology of Conquest

Aztec religion incorporated many features that had long been part of the Mesoameri-
can belief system. Religion was a vast, uniting, and sometimes oppressive force in which —
little distinction was made between the world of the gods and the natural world. The
traditional deities of Mesoamerica—the gods of rain, fire, water, corn, the sky, and the }
sun, many of whom had been worshiped as far back as the time of Teotihuacan—were —
venerated among the Aztecs. There were at least 128 major deities, but there seemed to _
be many more: As in popular Hinduism, each deity had a male and female form, because
a basic duality was recognized in all things. Moreover, gods might have different man. _
ifestations, somewhat like the avatars of the Hindu deities. Each god had at least five |
aspects, each associated with one of the cardinal directions and the center. Certain gods —
were thought to be the patrons of specific cities, ethnic groups, or occupations.

The gods were supported by a round of yearly festivals and ceremonies that in-
volved feasting and dancing along with penance and sacrifice. This complex array of ~
deities can be organized into three major themes or cults. The first were the gods of fer-
tility and the agricultural cycle, such as Tlaloc, the god of rain (called Chac by the Maya)
and the gods and goddesses of water, maize, and fertility. A second group centered on ~
the creator deities, the great gods and goddesses who had brought the universe into be-
ing. The story of their actions played a central role in Aztec cosmography. Much Aztec
abstract and philosophical thought was devoted to the theme of creation. Finally, the cult”
of warfare and sacrifice built on the preexisting Mesoamerican traditions that had been.
expanding since Toltec times and, under the militaristic Aztec state, became the cult of :
the state. Huitzilopochtli, the Aztec tribal patron, became the central figure of this cult.

The Aztecs revered the great traditional deities—such as Tlaloc and Quetzalcoatl, an at
cient god of civilization—that were so holy to the Toltecs; but their own tribal deity, Huitzilo
pochtli, was paramount. The Aztecs identified him with the old sun god, and they saw him
as a warrior in the daytime sky fighting to give life and warmth to the world against the a
forces of the night. To carry out that struggle, the sun needed strength, and just as the gods
had sacrificed themselves for humankind, the nourishment the gods needed most was that

Hun
exp;
thei,

—
Phot

--- End of Page 6 ---
which was most precious: human life in the form of hearts and blood. The great temple of
qenochtitlan was ‘dedicated to both Huitzilopochtli and Tlaloc. The tribal deity of the Aztecs
and the ancient agricultural god of the sedentary peoples of Mesoamerica were thus united.

In fact, although human sacrifice had long been a part of Mesoamerican religion, it
expanded considerably in the postclassical period of militarism. Warrior cults and the

militaristic images of jaguars and eagles devouring human hearts were characteristic
of Toltec art. The Aztecs simply took an existing tendency and carried it further. Both
the types and frequency of sacrifice increased, and a whole symbolism and ritual, which
included cannibalism, developed as part of the cult (Figure 8.3). How much of Aztec
sacrifice was the result of religious conviction and how much was a tactic of terror and
political control by the rulers and priests is still open to debate.

Beneath the surface of this polytheism, there was also a sense of spiritual unity.
Nezhualcoyotl, the king of Texcoco, wrote hymns to the “lord of the close vicinity,” an
invisible creative force that supported all the gods. Yet his conception of a kind of mono-
theism, much like that of Pharaoh Akhenaton in Egypt, appears to have been too abstract
and never gained great popularity.

Although the bloody aspects of Aztec religion have gained much attention, we must
also realize that the Aztecs concerned themselves with many of the same great religious
and spiritual questions that have preoccupied other civilizations: Is there life after death?
What is the meaning of life? What does it mean to live a good life? Do the gods really exist?

Nezhualcoyotl, whose poetry survived in oral form and was written down in the
sixteenth century, wondered about life after death:

Do flowers go to the land of the dead?

In the Beyond, are we dead or do we still live?
Where is the source of light, since that which gives life hides itself?

Figure 8.3

Human s Sacrifice was practiced by many Mesoamerican peoples, but the Aztecs apparently
fe owed its practice for political and religious reasons. This i image shows Aztec priests cutting out
eit victims’ hearts and then rolling the bodies down the steps of the pyramid.

PI
hoto. Researchers/Science History images/Alamy Stock Photo

Chapter 8: The Americas 193

Nezhualcoyotl
{nehz-uh-WAHL-koh-YOH-
tihl] Leading Aztec king of the
fifteenth century.

--- End of Page 7 ---
194 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 8.4

This Aztec stone calendar is about 12 feet across and 4 feet thick, and it weighs particular points in the calendar cycle (Figure 8.4).
about 24 tons. it was unearthed accidentally by construction crews in Mexico Moreover, the Aztecs also believed in a cyclical =

City in 1790.

As in the Vedas of ancient India, he also won.
dered about the existence of the gods:

Are you real, are you fixed?

Only You dominate all things
The Giver of Life.

Is this true?

Perhaps, as they say, it is not true.

Aztec religious art and poetry are filled with —
images of flowers, birds, and song, all of which
the Aztecs greatly admired, as well as human §
hearts and blood, the “precious water” needed to
sustain the gods. This mixture of images makes _
the’symbolism of Aztec religion difficult for mod-
ern observers to appreciate. :

Aztec religion depended on a complex my- ~
thology that explained the birth and history of
the gods and their relationship to peoples, and’
on a religious symbolism that infused all aspects —
of life. The Mesoamerican calendar system was
religious, and many ceremonies coincided with 7]

view of history, and that the world had-been de-

jejim/Shutterstock

chinampas

Beds of aquatic weeds, mud, and
earth placed in frames made

of cane and rooted in lakes to
create “floating islands”; system
of irrigated agriculture utilized
by Aztecs.

stroyed four times before and would be destroyed |
again. Thus, there was a certain fatalism in Aztec thought and a premonition that even-_
tually the sacrifices would be insufficient, and the gods would again bring catastrophe. |

8.2.2 Feeding the People: The Economy of the Empire

Feeding the great population of Tenochtitlan and the Aztec confederation in general de- |
pended on traditional forms of agriculture and on innovations developed by the Aztecs.
Lands of conquered peoples often were appropriated, and food sometimes was de- =
manded as tribute. In and around the lake, however, the Aztecs adopted an ingenious
system of irrigated agriculture by building chinampas. These were beds of aquatic”
weeds, mud, and earth that had been placed in frames made of cane and rooted to the.
lake floor. They formed artificial floating islands about 17 feet long and 100 to 330 feets
wide. This narrow construction allowed the water to reach all the plants, and willow
trees were also planted at intervals to give shade and help fix the roots. Much of the land
of Tenochtitlan itself was chinampa in origin, and in the southern end of the lake, more ;
than 20,000 acres of chinampas were constructed. The yield from chinampa agriculture
was high: Four cofn crops a year were possible. Apparently, this system of irrigated age
riculture had been used in preclassical days, but a rise in the level of the lakes had made
it impossible to continue. After 1200, however, lowering water levels once again stimu- |
lated chinampa construction, which the Aztecs carried out ona grand scale. Not only the 7
Aztecs, but all the peoples of Central and Northern Mexico realized that control of wate!
was the key to survival and ecological success. ;
Production by the Aztec peasantry and tribute provided the basic foods. In each
Aztec community, the local clan apportioned the lands, some of which were also set aside 7
for support of the temples and the state. In addition, individual nobles might have pie
vate estates, which were worked by servants or slaves from conquered peoples. Each-
community had periodic markets—according 'to various cycles in the calendar sys |
tem, such as every 5 and 13 days—in which a wide variety of goods were exchanged.

--- End of Page 8 ---
Cacao beans and gold dust sometimes were used as currency, but much trade was done
as barter. The great market at Tlatelolco (TLAT-ehl-UHL-koh) operated daily and was
controlled by the special merchant class, or pochteca, which specialized in long-distance
trade in luxury items such as plumes of tropical birds and cacao, The markets were highly
regulated and under the control of inspectors and special judges. Despite the importance
of the markets, this was not a market economy as we usually understand it.

The state controlled the use and distribution of many commodities and redistributed
the vast amounts of tribute received from subordinate peoples. Tribute levels were as-
signed according to whether the subject peoples had accepted Aztec rule or had fought
against it. Those who surrendered paid less. Tribute payments, such as food, slaves, and
sacrificial victims, served political and economic ends. More than 120,000 mantles of cot-
ton cloth alone were collected as tribute each year and sent to Tenochtitlan. The Aztec
state redistributed these goods. After the original conquests, it rewarded its nobility
richly, and the commoners received far less.

8.3 Aztec Society in Transition

What were the principal strengths and constraints of the Aztec economy and social
structure?

As with all civilizations, Aztec society experienced changes over time. The Mexica were
one of a number of peoples who spoke the Nahuatl language and occupied the region of
central Mexico. From their humble origins as hunters and gatherers they emerged as a
dominant power, and their rise created opportunities for some groups and a loss of status
for others within their society. Eventually, they held sway over the 50 or so political units
of the central valley of Mexico. Expansion by warfare privileged the warriors, and the re-
ligious basis for expansion made the priests and the cults of the temples a force in society.
No ruler could govern without the support of these sectors of society, a support obtained
and preserved by giving out rewards and benefits. But such policies transformed the
nature of Aztec society. :

Aztec society became more hierarchical as the empire grew and social classes with
different functions developed, although the older organization based on clans and kin-
ship groups never disappeared. Tribute was drawn from subject peoples, but Aztec
society confronted technological barriers that made it difficult to maintain the large pop-
ulation of central Mexico.

83.1 A Widening Social Gulf

During their wanderings, the Aztecs had been divided into seven calpulli, or clans, a
form of organization that they later expanded and adapted to their imperial position.
The calpulli were no longer only kinship groups but also residential groupings, which
might include neighbors, allies, and dependents. Much of Aztec local life was based on
the calpulli, which performed important functions such as distributing land to heads of
households, organizing labor gangs and military units in times of war, and maintaining a
temple and school. Calpulli were governed by councils of family heads, but not all fami-
lies were equal, nor were all calpulli of equal status.

The calpulli obviously had been the ancient and basic building block of Aztec society.
Inthe origins of Aztec society every person, noble and commoner, had belonged to a cal-
Pulli but as Aztec power increased, the calpulli had been transformed, and other forms
Of social stratification had emerged. As the empire expanded, a class of nobility emerged,
based on certain privileged families in the most distinguished calpulli. Originating
from the lineages that headed calpulli and from marriages, military achievements, or
Service to the state, this group of nobles accumulated high offices, private lands, and

Chapter 8: The Americas 195

pochteca

Special merchant class in Aztec
society; specialized in long-
distance trade in luxury items.

calpulli

[kal-PUHL-lee] Clans in Aztec
society, later expanded to
include residential groups that
distributed land and provided
labor and warriors.

--- End of Page 9 ---
196 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

other advantages. The most prominent families ; in
the calpulli, those who had dominated leadership
roles and formed a kind of local nobility, eventy.
ally were overshadowed by the military and ag.
ministrative nobility of the Aztec state.

Although some commoners might be pro.
moted ‘to noble status, most nobles were born into
the class. Nobles controlled the priesthood and the
military leadership. In fact, the military was orga.
nized into various ranks based on experience and_
success in taking captives (Figure 8.5). Military vir.
tues were linked to the cult of sacrifice and infused.
the whole society; they became the justification for
the nobility’ s status. The “flowery death,” or death
while taking prisoners for the sacrificial knife, was
the fitting end to a nobie life and ensured eternity
in the highest heaven—a reward also promised
to women who died in childbirth. The military
was highly ritualized. There were orders of war-
riors: The Jaguar and Eagle “Knights” and other

Figure 8.5

other insignia marked off the military ranks.
The social gulf that separated the nobility, or
pipiltin, from the commoners was widening as the —
empire grew. Egalitarian principles that may have —
existed in Aztec life disappeared, as happened
among the warring Germanic tribes of early me-
dieval Europe. Social distinctions were made ap-
parent by the use of and restrictions on clothing, |
hairstyles, uniforms, and other symbols of rank.
The imperial family became the most distin:
guished of the pipiltin families.
As the nobility broke free from their old calpulli
In the militarized society of the Aztec Empire, warriors were organized into and acquired private lands, a new class of workers
regiments and groups distinguished by their uniforms. They gained rank and almost like serfs was created to serve as labo vers
respect by capturing enemies for sacrifice. Note the symbolic gripping of the . j
defeated captives’ hair as a sign of military success. on these lands. Unlike the noaniaaiaieid attached iy
“The Hislbiy ColSGnT/Aleiny Sek Phais the land-controlling calpulli, these workers did not
- control land, and they worked at the will of others.
Their status was low, but it was still above that of the slaves, who might have been wat
captives, criminals, or people who had sold themselves into bondage to escape hunge!: |

Finally, there were other social groups. The scribes, artisans, and healers all were part of
an intermediate group that was especially important in the larger cities. The long-distance ;
merchants formed a sort of calpulli with their own patron gods, privileges, and internal”
divisions. They sometimes served as spies or agents for the Aztec military, but they were
subject to restrictions that hindered their entry into or rivalry with the nobility.
It is possible to see an emerging conflict between the nobility and the commone!$
and to interpret this as a class struggle, but some specialists emphasize that to interpret
Aztec society on that basis is to impose Western concepts on a different reality. Corporal? |
~ bodies such as the calpulli, temple maintenance associations, and occupational group®

cut across class and remained important in Aztec life. Competition between corporat
groups often was more apparent—and more violent—than competition between social

classes.

--- End of Page 10 ---
went into preparing the basic food. .

and control such vast numbers of people.

Chapter 8: The Americas . 197

3.3.2’ Overcoming Technological Constraints

Membership in society was thus defined by participation in various wider groups, such
ag the calpulli or a specific social class. It was also defined by gender roles. Aztec women
assumed a variety of roles. Peasant women helped in the fields, but their primary do-
main was the household, where child-rearing and cooking took up much time. Above
all, weaving skill was highly regarded. The responsibility for training young girls fell to
the older women. Marriages often were arranged between lineages, and virginity at mar-
riage was highly regarded for young women. Polygamy existed among the nobility, but
the peasants were monogamous. Aztec women could inherit property and pass it to their
heirs. The rights of Aztec women seem to have been fully recognized, but in political and
social life their role, although complementary to that of men, remained subordinate.

The technology of the Americas limited social development in a variety of ways.
Here we can see a significant difference between the lives of women in Mesoamerica
and in the Mediterranean world. In the maize-based economies of Mesoamerica, women
ent six hours a day grinding corn by hand on stone boards, or metates, to prepare the
household’s food. Although similar hand techniques were used in ancient Egypt, they
were eventually replaced by animal- or water-powered mills that turned wheat into
flour. The miller or baker of Rome or medieval Europe could do the work of hundreds of
women. Maize was among the simplest and most productive cereals to grow but among
the most time-consuming to prepare. Without the wheel or suitable animals for power,
the Indian civilizations were unable to free women from the 30 to 40 hours a week that

Finally, we must consider the size of the population of the Aztec state. Estimates
have varied widely, from as little as 1.5 million to more than 25 million, but there is con-
siderable evidence that population density was high, resulting in a total population that
was far greater than previously suspected. Some historical demographers estimate that
the population of Central Mexico under Aztec control reached over 20 million, excluding
the Maya areas. This underlines the extraordinary ability of the Aztec state to intimidate

Document
Aztec Women and Men

In the mid-sixteenth century, bernardino de sahagun, a
Spanish missionary, prepared an extraordinary encyclopedia
of Aztec culture. His purpose was to gather this information
to learn the customs and beliefs of the Indians and their
language in order to better convert them. Although Sahagutin
hated the Indian religion, he came to admire many aspects
of their culture. His Florentine Codex: The General History of
ihe Things of New Spain is one of the first ethnographies and
a remarkable compendium of Aztec culture. Sahaguin used
many indian informants to tell him about the days before the
European arrival, and even though this work dates from the
Postconquest era, it contains much useful information about

oret
vale earlier Aztec life.
aps In the following excerpts, the proper behavior for people

in different roles in Aztec society are described by the Aztecs
themselves.

Father

One's father is the source of lineage. He is the sincere
one. One’s father is diligent, solicitous, compassionate,
sympathetic, a careful administrator of his household. He
rears, he teaches others, he advises, he admonishes one. He
is exemplary; he leads a model life. He stores up for himself;
he stores up for others. He cares for his assets; he saves for
others. He is thrifty; he saves for the future, teaches thrift. He
regulates, distributes with care, establishes order.

“The bad father is incompassionate, negligent, unreliable.
He is unfeeling... a shirker, a loafer, a sullen worker.

Mother

One’s mother has children; she suckles them. Sincere,
vigilant, agile, she is an energetic worker—diligent, watchful,

--- End of Page 11 ---
198 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

solicitous, full of anxiety. She teaches people; she is attentive
to them. She caresses, she serves others; she is apprehensive
for their welfare; she is careful, thrifty—constantly at work.
The bad mother is evil, dull, stupid, sleepy, lazy. She is a
squanderer, a petty thief, a deceiver, a fraud. Unreliable, she is one
who loses things through neglect or anger, who heeds no one.
She is disrespectful, inconsiderate, disregarding, careless. She
shows the way to disobedience; she expounds nonconformity.

The Rulers

The ruler is a shelter—fierce, revered, famous, esteemed, well~
reputed, renowned.

The good ruler is a protector: one who carries his subjects
in his arms, who unites them, who brings them togéther. He
rules, he takes responsibilities, assumes burdens. He carries his
subjects in his cape; he bears them in his arms. He governs; he
is obeyed. To him as a shelter, as refuge, there is recourse...

The bad ruler is a wild beast, a demon of the air, an
ocelot, a wolf—infamous, avoided, detested as a respecter of
nothing. He terrifies with his gaze; he makes the earth rumble;
he implants; he spreads fear. He is wished dead.

The Noble

The noble has a mother, a father. He resembles his parents.
The good nobie is obedient, cooperative, a follower of his
parents’ ways, a discreet worker; attentive, willing. He follows
the ways of his parents; he resembles his father; he becomes
his father’s successor; he assumes his lot.

One of noble lineage is a follower of the exemplary life,
a taker of the good example of others, a seeker, a follower of
the exemplary life. He speaks eloquently; he is soft-spoken,
virtuous, deserving of gratitude. He is noble of heart, gentle
of word, discreet, well-reared, well-iaught. He is moderate,
energetic, inquiring, inquisitive. He scratches the earth with a
thorn. He is one who fasts, who starves his entrails, who parches
his lips. He provides nourishment to others. He sustains one, he
serves food, he provides comfort. He is a concealer [of himself],
a belittler of himself. He magnifies and praises others. He is a
mourner for the dead, a doer of penances, a gracious speaker,
devout, godly, desirable, wanted, memorable.

The bad noble is ungrateful and forgetful, a debaser,
a disparager of things, contemptuous of others, arrogant,
bragging. He creates disorder, glories over his lineage, extols
his own virtues.

The Mature Common Woman

The good mature woman is candid. She is resolute, firm

of heart, constant—not to be dismayed; brave like a man. _

vigorous,. resolute, Persevering—not one to falter. She is

long-suffering; she accepts reprimands calmly—endures _

things like a man. She becomes firm—takes courage. She ig

intent. She gives of herself. She goes in humility. She exerts

herself.

The bad woman is thin, tottering, weak—an inconstant*

companion, unfriendly. She annoys others, chagrins them, shames,
oppresses one. She becomes impatient; she loses hope, becomes
embarrassed —chagrined. Evil is her life; she lives in shame.

The Weaver of Designs

“She concerns herself with using thread, works with thread,
The good weaver of designs is skilled—a maker of varicolored
capes, an outliner of designs, a blender of colors, a joiner of
pieces, a matcher of pieces, a person of good memory.. She
does things dexterously. She weaves designs. She selects,
She weaves tightly. She forms borders. She forms the neck....

The bad weaver of designs is untrained—silly, foolish,
unobservant, unskilled of hand, ignorant, stupid, She tangles
the thread, she harms her work—she spoils it.

The Physician

The physician is a knower of herbs, of roots, of trees, of
stones; she is experienced in these. She is one who conducts
examinations; she is a woman of experience, of trust, of
professional skill: a counselor.

The good physician is a restorer, a provider of health, a
relaxer—one who makes pedple feel well, who envelops one in
ashes. She cures people; she provides them health; she lances
them; she bleeds them... pierces them with an obsidian lancet.

SOURCE: Bernardino de Sahagun, “Florentine Codex: The General History of
the Things of New Spain”, trans. and ed. Arthur J. O. Anderson and Charles
Dibble (Santa Fe, NM; Salt Lake City: University of Utah: 1950-1982).

Review Questions:
1. In what ways do the expectations for men and women
differ in Aztec society?
2. To what extent do the roles for men and women in Aztec
society differ from our own?
3. Did the Aztecs value the same characteristics as our
own and other historical societies?

8.3.3 A Tribute Empire

Each city-state was ruled by a speaker chosen from the nobility. The Great Speaker, the
ruler of Tenochtitlan, was first among supposed equals. He was in effect the emperol
with great private wealth and public power, and was increasingly considered a living
god. His court was magnificent and surrounded with elaborate rituals. Those who ap’

proached him could not look him in the eye and were required to throw dirt upon theif


--- End of Page 12 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 199

2 yieads: as a sign-of humility. In theory he was. eletted, but his election was really a choice
petween siblings of the same royal family. The prime minister held a position of tremen-

firm dous power and usually was a close relative of the ruler. There was a governing council;
man, E in theory; the rulers of the other cities in the alliance also had a say in government, but in
‘ is 7] reality most power was in the hands of the Aztec ruler and his chief advisor.
hea During the century of greatest Aztec expansion after 1426, a social and political
i transformation had taken place. The position and nature of the old calpulli clans had
Xerts , changed radically, and a newly powerful nobility with a deified and nearly absolute ruler
3 had emerged. The ancient cult of military virtues had been elevated to a supreme posi-
os tion as the religion of the state, and the double purpose of securing tribute for the state
™ 3 and obtaining victims for Huitzilopochtli drove further Aztec conquests.
me The empire was never integrated, and local rulers often stayed in place to act as tribute

‘collectors for the Aztec overlords. In many ways the Aztec Empire was simply an expansion
of Jong-existing Mesoamerican concepts and institutions of government, and it was not un-
like the subject city-states over which it gained control. These city-states, in turn, wére often

ead, left unchanged if they recognized Aztec supremacy and met their obligations of labor and
ored Si tribute. Tribute payments served both an economic and a political function, concentrating
er of power and wealth in the Aztec capital. Archeologists at the recent excavations of the Great
She Temple beneath the center of Mexico City have been impresséd by the large number of of-
acts, ferings and objects that came from the farthest ends of the empire and beyond. At the fron-
Kees tiers, neighboring states such as that of the Tarascans of Michoacan in West Central Mexico
dish, preserved their freedom, while within the empire enclaves of independent kingdoms such
igles as Tlaxcala (tlaks-KAHL-uh) maintained a fierce opposition to the Aztecs. There were many

revolts against Aztec rule or a particular tribute burden, which

E thlessly.
the Aztecs often put down ruthlessly. ; Map 8.2 INCA EXPANSION
4 In general, the Aztec system was a success because it __ 7 _
3 of aimed at exerting political domination and not necessarily Sy ge py
; a 7 oon = ——_ — C= -——-f j
ucts direct administrative or territorial control. In the long run, 9 2 ~®™""
» of however, the increasing social stresses created by the rise of [inca Empire | pe .
the nobles and the system of terror and tribute imposed on To 1438 | a fez
ha subject peoples were internal weaknesses that contributed to aon ® wl eo eed
en = the Aztec empire's collapse. _— % a5a7 | SOUTH po car
(Ces ae The Aztecs were a continuation of the long process of civi- Ao
cel lization in Mesoamerica. The civilizations of the classic era did —— © a ~
tof not simply disappear in Central Mexico or among the Maya in
s = Yucatan and Central America, but they were reinterpreted and

adapted to new political and social realities. When Europeans
arrived in Mexico, they assumed that what they found was the H PACIFIC
culmination of Indian civilization, when-in fact it was the mil- |: OCEAN

tarized afterglow of earlier achievements. «20S = at

BC.

8.4 Twantinsuyu: World of =~ =_2"*
0 200 400 KILOMETERS

3 the Incas

F What were the Principal causes of the expansion of the |

q Taca Empire? Santiago,
he Almost at the same time that the Aztecs extended their con- | Ps} )
of, trol over much of Mesoamerica, another great imperial state wr atau OW dw
ng was using in the Andean highlands, and it eventually be- _ - 7
po Came an empire some 3,000 miles in extent (Map 8.2). The Each ruler expanded the empire in a series of campaigns to

increase wealth and political control.

ar Trea Empire incorporated many aspects of previous Andean


--- End of Page 13 ---
200 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

ayllus

[EYEL-lehs] Households

in Andean societies that
recognized some form of
kinship; traced descent from
some common, sometimes
mythical ancestor.

Pachacuti

{[PACH-uh-KOO-tee] Ruler of
Inca society from 1438 to 1471;
launched a series of military
campaigns that gave Incas
control of the region from Cuzco
to the shores of Lake Titicaca.

Twantinsuyu
[twahn-tihn-SOO-yoo] Word
for Inca Empire; region from
present-day Colombia to Chile
and eastward to northem
Argentina.

split inheritance

Inca practice of descent; all titles
and political power went to
successor, but wealth and land
remained in the hands of male
descendants for support of cult
of dead Inca’s mummy.

cultures but fused them together in new ways. With a genius for state organization and
bureaucratic control over peoples of different cultures and languages, it achieved a level 1
of integration and domination previously unknown in the Americas.

After about 1300 c.z., the Inca Empire emerged in the highlands of Peru and eventy. _
ally spread its control over the whole region by integrating many ethnic groups into an
extensive imperial state.

Throughout the Andean cultural hearth, after the breakup of the large “intermegj. _
ate horizon” states of Tiahuanaco and Huari (c. 550-1000 c.z.), several smaller regional’
states continued to exercise some power. Unlike the breakdown of power that took’
place in postclassical Mesoamerica, in the Andean zone many large states continued to
be important. Some states in the Andean highlands on the broad open areas near Lake

Titicaca and the states along rivers on the north coast, such as those in the Moche valley, the
remained centers of agricultural activity and population density. This was a period of re}
war between rival local chiefdoms and small states and in some ways was an Andean _ the

parallel to the post-Toltec militaristic era in Mesoamerica. Of these states, the coastal _
kingdom of Chimor, centered on its capital of Chan-Chan, emerged as the most power. _
ful. Between 900 and its conquest by the Incas in 1465, it gained control of most of the

north coast of Peru. :

8.4.1 The Inca Rise to Power

While Chimor spread its control over 600 miles of the coast, in the southern Andean _
highlands, where there were few large urban areas, ethnic groups and small states
struggled for survival. Among these groups were several related Quechua-speaking :
clans, or ayllus, living near Cuzco, an area that had been under the influence of Huari,
a powerful state, but had not been particularly important. Their own legends stated
that 10 related clans emerged from caves in the region and were taken to Cuzco bya
mythical leader. Wherever their origins, by about 1350 c.z. they lived in and around
Cuzco, and by 1438 they had defeated their hostile neighbors in the area. At this point —
under their ruler, or Inca, Pachacuti (r. 1438-1471), they launched a series of military
alliances and campaigns that brought them control of the whole area from Cuzco to the
shores of Lake Titicaca.
Over the next 60 years, Inca armies were constantly on the march, extending control
over a vast territory. Pachacuti’s son and successor, Topac Yupanqui (TOH-pak YUH-
pan-KEE), conquered the northern coastal kingdom of Chimor by seizing its irrigation
system, and he extended Inca control into the southern area of what is now Ecuador. Ats —
the other end of the empire, Inca armies reached the Maule River in Chile against stiff*
resistance from the Araucanian Indians. The next ruler, Huayna Capac (WEYE-nah kab- -
PAHK) (x. 1493-1527), consolidated these conquests and suppressed rebellions on the
frontiers. By the time of his death, the Inca Empire—or, as they called it, Twantinsuyu—-
stretched from what is now Colombia to Chile and eastward across Lake Titicaca and
Bolivia to northern Argentina. Between 9 million and 13 million people of different ethnic a
backgrounds and languages came under Inca rule, a remarkable feat, given the extent of
the empire and the technology available for transportation and communication. E

8.4.2 Conquest and Religion

What impelled the Inca conquest and expansion? The usual desire for economic gait
and political power that we have seen in other empires is one possible explanation,
but there may be others more in keeping with Inca culture and ideology. The cult of !
the ancestors was extremely important in Inca belief. Deceased rulers were mummified
and then treated as intermediaries with the gods, paraded in public during festivals,
offered food and gifts, and consulted on important matters by special oracles. From the
Chimor kingdom the Incas adopted the practice of royal split inheritance, whereby

--- End of Page 14 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 201

and
level

all the political power and titles of the ruler went to his successor but all his palaces,
wealth, land, and possessions remained in the hands of his male descendants, who
used them to support the cult of the dead Inca’s mummy for eternity. To ensure his

own cult and place for eternity, each new Inca needed to secure land and wealth, and
these normally came as part of new conquests. In effect, the greater the number of past
rulers, the greater the number of royal courts to support, and the greater the demand
for labor, lands, and tribute. This system created a self- -perpetuating need for expan-
sion, tied directly to ancestor worship and the cult of the royal mummies, as well as
tensions between the various royal lineages. The cult of the dead weighed heavily on

entu:
to an

nedi-
ional a
took

ed to the living.

Lake. Inca political and social life was infused with religious meaning. Like the Aztecs,
alley, the Incas held the sun to be the highest deity and considered the Inca to be the sun’s
od of representative on earth. The magnificent Temple of the Sun in Cuzco was the center of
dean — the state religion, and in its confines the mummies of the past Incas were kept. The cult
vastal of the sun was spread throughout the empire, but the Incas did not prohibit the worship

wer-
of the

of local gods.
Other deities were also worshiped as part of the state religion. Viracocha (vee-reh-

KOH-chuh), a creator god, was a favorite of Inca Pachacuti and rémained important.
Popular belief was based on a profound animism that endowed many natural phenom-
ena with spiritual power. Mountains, stones, rivers, caves, tombs, and temples were
considered huacas, or holy shrines. At these places, prayers were offered and animals,

dean — ves . ; : :
goods, and humans were sacrificed. In the Cuzco area, imaginary lines running from

itates:
aking
Tuari,
tated —
bya
ound =
point

litary

Visualizing the Past
Archeological Evidence of Political Practices

The inca system of split inheritance probably originated in the Review Questions:

: Chimu ki . Chi ing list 7 .
to the 5 imu “ingdom ens sts eee at ee sind 1. To what extent does such evidence indicate the
waters a Chan-Chan, ve enim mae a eves im composite nature of Inca culture?
rge walled . ist: i at eacl .
‘ ‘he 9 " 3 ee reneo nel = Tine’ iden 2. What are some of the possible problems of archeological
of these palatial compounds was a different king’s residence interpretation?

and that each became a mausoleum for his mummy upon F .
Y up 3. To what extent can material remains be used to explain

his death. or illustrate social phenomena?

Chan-Chan covered more than two square miles, It contained
Palace compounds, storehouses, residences, markets, and other City of Chan-Chan.

structures.
CRIS BOURONCLE/AFP/Getty Images

J Marshall - Tribaleye Images/Alamy Stock Photo


--- End of Page 15 ---
202 Part Ii: The Mongol Age, t200-1450

tambos

Way stations used by Incas as
inns and storehouses; supply
centers for Inca armies on the
move; relay points for system of
runners used to carry messages.

mita

Labor extracted for lands assigned
to the state and the religion; all
communities were expected to
contribute; an essential aspect of
Inca imperial control.

Inca socialism

A view created by Spanish
authors to describe Inca society
as a type of utopia; image of
the Inca Empire as a carefully
organized system in which
every community collectively
contributed to the whole.

the Temple of the Sun organized the huacas into groups for which certain ayllus took
responsibility. The temples were served by many priests and women dedicated to pra.
paring cloth and food for sacrifice. The temple priests were responsible mainly for the
great festivals and celebrations and for the divinations on which state actions often
depended.

8.4.3 The Techniques of Inca Imperial Rule

The Inca were able to control their vast empire by using techniques and practices
that ensured cooperation or subordination. The empire was ruled by the Inca, who
was considered almost a god. He ruled from his court at Cuzco, which was also the
site of the major temple; the high priest usually was a close relative. Twantinsuyy

~-was divided into four great provinces, each under a governor, and then divided

again. The Incas developed a state bureaucracy i in which almost all nobles played
a role. Although some chroniclers spoké of a state organization based on decimal
units of 10,000, 1000, 100, and smaller numbers of households to mobilize taxes and
Jabor, recent research reveals that many local practices and variations were allowed

to continue under Inca rule. Local rulers, or curacas, were allowed to maintain their.

positions and were given privileges by the Inca in return for their loyalty. The cu-
racas were exempt from tribute obligations and usually received labor or produce

from those under their control. For insurance, the sons of conquered chieftains were

taken to Cuzco for their education.
The Incas intentionally spread the Quechua (KEHCH-

Map 8.3 THE ANCIENT CITIES OF PERU

uh-wah) language as a means of integrating the empire. The

|
(%-— = Equator——-—= =~

i |

Tumbes

50° a

PACIFIC
OCEAN

v0 200 400 MILES

1 0 200 400KILOMETERS

e SOUTH ocd

Incas moved a conquered population to anew home. Through-

system of runners who carried messages throughout the em-
pire. The Inca probably maintained more than 10,000 tambos.

populations. Conquered peoples were enlisted in the Inca
armies under Inca officers and were rewarded with goods from
new conquests. Subject peoples received access to goods not
previously available to them, and the Inca state undertook large
building and irrigation projects that formerly would have been

The state claimed all resources and redistributed them. The In-

for the state, and lands for the sun—that is, for religion and the
support of priests. Also, some nobles held private estates.

ae demand tribute in kind but rather exacted labor on the lands
‘assigned to the state and the religion. Communities were &

The Inca system of roads, with its series of tambos, linked major
towns and cities and allowed rapid conimunication and troop
movement.

pected to take turns working on state and church lands and
sometimes on building projects or in mining. These’ labor
turns, or mita, were an essential aspect of Inca control. In ad-
dition, the Inca required women to weave high-quality cloth

Incas also made extensive use of colonists. Sometimes Quec- |
hua speakers from Cuzco were settled in a newly won area to, |
provide an example and a garrison. On other occasions, the ~

out the empire, a complex system of roads was built, with —
bridges and causeways when needed (Map 8.3). Along these 7
roads, way stations, or tambos, were placed about a day’s walk

apart to serve as inns, storehouses, and supply centers for Inca —
armies on the move. Tambos also served as relay points for the —

The Inca Empire extracted land and labor from subject —

impossible. In return, the Incas demanded loyalty and tribute.

cas divided conquered areas into lands for the people, lands :

With few exceptions the Incas, unlike the Aztecs, did not

for t
nold
and

were
Inca
appl


--- End of Page 16 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 203

for the court and for religious purposes. The Incas provided the wool, but each house-
hold was required to produce cloth. Woven cloth, a great Andean art form, had political
and religious significance. Some women were taken as concubines for the Inca; others
were selected as servants at the temples, the so-called Virgins of the Sun. In all this, the
Inca had an overall imperial system but remained sensitive to local variations, so that its
application accommodated regional and ethnic differences.

Thinking Historically

The “Troubling” Civilizations of the Americas

From the first encounter with the peoples of the Americas,
European concepts and judgments about civilization,
barbarism, morality, power, politics, and justice were constantly
called into question. The American Indian societies had many
religious ideas and practices that shocked Christian observers,
and aspects of their social and familial arrangements clashed
with European sensibilities. Those sensibilities often were
influenced by religious and political considerations. Many of
those who most condemned human sacrifice, polygamy, or
the despotism of Indian ruters were also those who tried to
justify European conquest and control, mass violence, and
theft on a continental scale. Other European voices also were
heard. Not long after the Spanish conquests in the sixteenth
century, defenders of Indian rights came forward to argue that
despite certain “unfortunate” habits, Indian civilization was
no less to be admired than that of the ancient (and pagan)
Romans and Greeks.

For Western civilization, evaluating and judging non-
Western or past societies has always been a complex
business that has mixed elements of morality, politics, religion,
and self-perception along with the record of what is observed
or considered to be reality. That complexity is probably just
as true for Chinese culture, Persian culture, or any culture
trying to understand another. Still, Western society seems to
have been particularly troubled by the American civilizations,
with their peculiar combination of Neolithic technology and
imperial organization. At times this has led to abhorrence and
rejection—as of Aztec sacrifice—but at other times it has led to
a kind of utopian romanticism in which the accomplishments
of the Indian past are used as a critique of the present and a”
Political program for the future.

The existence of Inca socialism is a case in point. Some
early Spanish authors portrayed Inca rule as despotic, but
others saw it as a kind of utopia. Shortly after the conquest
of Peru, Garcilaso de la Vega, the son of a Spaniard and an
Indian noblewoman, wrote a glowing history of his mother’s
People in which he presented an image of the Inca Empire
as a carefully organized system in which every community
Contributed to the whole, and the state regulated the
distribution of resources on the basis of need and reciprocity.
There was some truth in this view, but it ignored same aspects

of exploitation as well. In the twentieth century, Peruvian
socialists, faced with underdevelopment and social inequality
in their country, used this utopian view of Inca society as a
possible model for their own future. Their interpretation and
that of historians who later wrote of Inca socialism tended to
ignore the hierarchy in the Inca Empire and the fact that the
state extracted labor and goods from the subject communities
to support the nobles, who held extensive power. The utopian
view of the Incas was no less political than the despotic view.
Perhaps the lesson here is that what we. see in the past often
depends on what we think about the present or what we want
for the future.

But if Inca socialism and despotism have fascinated
students of the past, Aztec religion has caught the imagination
of historians and the general public. It causes us to ask how
a civilization as advanced as this could engage in a practice
so cruel and, to us, so morally reprehensible. Perhaps nothing
challenges our appreciation of the American civilizations
more than the extensive evidence of ritual torture and human
sacrifice, which reached staggering proportions under Aztec
rule. On some occasions thousands of people were slain,
usually by having their hearts ripped out.

First, we must put these practices in perspective. Cruelty
and violence: can be found in many cultures, and to a world
that has seen genocide, mass killings, and atomic warfare, the
Aztec practices are not so different from what our own age has
seen. Gertain customs in many past civilizations and present
cultures seem to us strange, cruel, and immoral. We find Aztec
human sacrifice particularly abhorrent, but such practices
also were found among the ancient Canaanites and the
Celtic peoples, and the Old Testament’story of Abraham and
Isaac, although its message is against such sacrifice, reflects
a practice known in the ancient Near East. Human sacrifice
was practiced in pre-Christian Scandinavia and ancient India.
Although by the time of Confucius human sacrifice of wives
and retainers at the burial of a ruler was no longer practiced
in China, the custom had been known. Sati, the Hindu ritual
suicide of the widow on the funeral pyre of her husband,
existed in India in the nineteenth century, although admittedly it
may have been exaggerated by the British colonial authorities.
The Aztecs certainly were not alone in taking human life as


--- End of Page 17 ---
204 Part II: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

a religious rite, Whatever our moral judgments about such

which lacked cattle and sheep, that transformation Never took {

customs, it remains the historian’s responsibility to understand place. Harris called the Aztec empire a “cannibal kingdom»
them in the context of their own culture and time. Other scholars have strongly objected to Harris’s interpretation e sm
How have historians tried to explain or understand Aztec of the evidence, which gave little attention to the ritual aspects the!
human sacrifice? Some defenders of Aztec culture have seen it of these acts. Still, human sacrifice shades all assessments of state
as a limited phenomenon, greatly exaggerated by the Spanish Aztec civilization. get
for political purposes. Many scholars ; These debates ultimately raj
have seen it as a religious act central Perhaps nothing challenges important questions about the 7 an
to the Aztec belief that humans must our appreciation of the of moral judgments in historica, a
sacrifice that which was most precious to American civilizations more analysis and the way in which oy Hae
them—life—to receive the sun, rain, and © than the extensive evidence sion of the past is influenced py 4 |
other. blessings of the gods. that make of ritual torture and human our own political, moral, ethical, and ofp
life possible. Others have viewed Aztec sacrifice. social programs. We cannot and and
Practice as the intentional manipulation perhaps should not abandon those fort
and expansion of a widespread phenomenon that had long -Programs, but we must always try to understand other times
existed among many American peoples. In other words, the and other peoples in their own terms. and
Aztec rulers, priests, and nobility used the cult of war and . sitio
large-scale human sacrifice for political purposes, to terrorize Review Questions: fis.
their neighbors and subdue the lower classes. Another 1. What special features of Aztec civilization must be stat
possible explanation is demographic. If Central Mexico was as explained? The
densely populated as we believe, then the sacrifices may have 2. Are they really distinctive? they
been a kind of population control. 3. What explanations are most persuasive in terms of larg
Other interpretations have been even more startling. historical sensitivity and contemporary standards? oreje
Anthropologist Marvin Harris has suggested that Aztec 4. What features of twenty-first-century society are similar Emy
sacrifice, accompanied by ritual cannibalism, was a response to those of Aztec civilization in that they will later need to ica,
to a lack of protein. He argued that in the Old World, human be explained? emp
sacrifice was replaced by animal sacrifice, but in Mesoamerica, tion
of tl
brot

In theory, each community aimed at self-sufficiency and depended on the state _

for goods it could not acquire easily. The ayllus of each community controlled the

land, and the vast majority of the men were peasants and herders. Women worked in of
the fields, wove cloth, and cared for the household (Figure 8.6). Roles and obligations — of s
were gender-specific and, at least in theory, equal.and interdependent. Andean peo- sub;
ples recognized parallel descent, so that property rights within the ayllus and among _ ipl

the nobility passed in both the male and female lines. Women passed rights and prop-
erty to daughters, men to sons. Whether in pre-Inca times women may have served —
as leaders of ayllus is open to question, but under the Incas this seems to have been
uncommon. The Inca emphasis on military virtues reinforced the inequality of men
and women.

The concept of close cooperation between men and women was also reflected in the ;
Inca view of the cosmos. Gods and goddesses were worshiped by men and women, but —
women felt a particular affinity for the moon and the goddesses of the earth and corn:
the fertility deities. The Inca queen, the Inca’s senior wife (usually also a sister of the _
Inca), was seen as a link to the moon. Queen and sister of the sun, she represented int —
perial authority to all women. But despite an ideology of gender equality, Inca practice —
created a gender hierarchy that paralleled the dominance of the Inca state over subject —
peoples. This fact is supported, and the power of the empire over local ethnic groups is —
demonstrated, by the Incas’ ability to select the most beautiful young women to serve the
temples or be given to the Inca.

The integration of imperial policy with regional and ethnic diversity was a political _
achievement. Ethnic headmen were left in place, but over them were administratog z


--- End of Page 18 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 205

drawn from the Inca nobility in Cuzco. Reciprocity and hi-
erarchy continued to characterize Andean groups as they
came under Inca rule; reciprocity between the state and
the local community was simply an added level. The Inca
state could provide roads, irrigation projects, and hard-to-
a goods. For example, maize usually was grown on irri-
gated land and was particularly important as a ritual crop.
state-sponsored irrigation added to its cultivation. The
Inca state manipulated the idea of reciprocity to extract Ta-
bor power, and it dealt harshly with resistance and revolt.
In addition to the ayllu peasantry, there was also a class
of-people, the yanas, who were removed from their ayllus
and served permanently as servants, artisans, or workers
for the Inca or the nobility.

Members of the Inca nobility were greatly privileged,
and those related to the Inca himself held the highest po-
sitions. The nobility were all drawn from the 10 royal ayl-
lus. In addition, the residents of Cuzco were given noble
status to enable them to serve in high bureaucratic posts.
The nobles were distinguished by dress and custom. Only
they were entitled to wear the large ear spools that en-
larged the ears and caused the Spaniards to later call them
orejones, or “big ears.” Noticeably absent in most of the Inca
Empire was a distinct merchant class. Unlike in Mesoamer-
ica, where long-distance trade was so important, the Incas’
etnphasis on self-sufficiency and state regulation of produc-
tion and surplus limited trade. Only in the northern areas
of the empire, in the chiefdoms of Ecuador, the last region
brought under Inca control, did a specialized class of trad-
ers exist.

Figure 8.6

This Inca sculpture, made of gold, portrays one of the mamaconas,
or “chosen women,” who served as concubines to the Inca emperors.
Fhe wool of her cloak is woven in a classic Inca design.

- The Inca imperial system, which controlled an area Wemer Forman/Art Resource, NY

of almost 3,000 miles, was a stunning achievement

of statecraft, but like all other empires it lasted only as long as it could control its
subject populations and its own mechanisms of government. A system of royal mul-
tiple marriages as a way of forging alliances created rival claimants for power and
the possibility of civil war. That is exactly what happened in the 1520s, just before
the Europeans arrived. When the Spanish first arrived in Peru, they saw an empire
Weakened by civil strife.

8.4.4 Inca Cultural Achievements

The Incas drew on the artistic traditions of their Andean predecessors and the skills of
subject peoples. Beautiful pottery and cloth were produced in specialized workshops.
Inca metalworking was among the most advanced in the Americas, and Inca artisans
worked gold and silver with great skill. The Incas also used copper and some bronze for
Weapons and tools. Like the Mesoamerican peoples, the Incas made no practical use of
the wheel, but unlike them, they had no system of writing. However, the Incas did use a
System of knotted strings, or quipu, to record numerical and perhaps other information.
It worked like an abacus, and with it the Incas took censuses and kept financial records.
The Incas had a passion for numerical order, arid the populace was divided into decimal

_ units from which population, military enlistment, and work details could be calculated.

The existence of so many traits associated with civilization in the Old World combined

yanas
A class of people within Inca
society removed from their
ayllus to serve permanently as
servants, artisans, or workers for
the Inca or the Inca nobility.

quipu

[KEE-poo] System of knotted
strings utilized by the Incas
in place of a writing system; ]
could contain numerical and
other types of information for
censuses and financial records. |


--- End of Page 19 ---
206 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

with the absence of a system of writing among the Incas illustrates the variations of j
human development and the dangers of becoming too attached to certain cultural char. 8.
acteristics or features in defining civilizations. 5 Wh:
The Incas’ genius was best displayed in their land and water management, exten. ares
sive road system, statecraft, and architecture and public buildings. They developeg
ingenious agricultural terraces on the steep slopes of the Andes, using a complex — Ratl
technology of irrigation to water their crops. The empire was linked together by al. its
most 2,500 miles of roads, many of which included rope suspension bridges ove; sudl
mountain gorges and rivers. Inca stonecutting was remarkably accurate; the best i
buildings were built of large fitted stones without the use of mortar. Some of these epia
buildings were immense. These structures, the large agricultural terraces and in. wel
gation projects, and the extensive system of rdads were among the Incas’ greatest | ye
achievements, displaying their technical ability 4s well as their ability to mobilize os
large amounts of labor. » and
: Col:
8.4.5 Comparing Incas and Aztecs a
The Inca and the Aztec cultures were based on a long development of civilization that- agt’
preceded them. Although in some areas of artistic and intellectual achievement earlier __ Wor
peoples had surpassed their accomplishments, both cultures represented the success _ agn
of imperial and military organization. Both empires were based on’intensive agricul- _
ture organized by a state that accumulated surplus production and then controlled the x icar
circulation of goods and their redistribution to groups or social classes, although the _ off
well-developed merchant class of Mesoamerica was mostly absent in the Inca realm. In ure
both states, older kinship-based institutions, the ayllu and the calpulli, were transformed —
by the emergence of a social hierarchy in which the nobility was increasingly predom- _ ;
iriant. In both areas, these nobles also were the personnel of the state, so that the state _ An
organization was almost an image of society. off
Although the Incas tried to create an overarching political state and to integrate the
their empire as a unit (the Aztecs did less in this regard), both empires recognized lo- que
cal ethnic groups and political leaders and allowed variation from one group or region. — Int
to another as long as. Inca or Aztec sovereignty was recognized and tribute was paid. tion
Both the Aztecs and the Incas, like the Spaniards who followed them, found that their int
military power was less effective against nomadic peoples who lived on their frontiers. mi
Essentially, the empires were created by the conquest of sedentary agricultural peoples det
and the extraction of tribute and labor from them. tiv
We cannot overlook the great differences between Mesoamerica and the Andean re- § hig
gion in terms of climate and geography or the differences between the Inca and Aztec the

civilizations. Trade and markets were far more developed in the Aztec Empire and ear- —
lier in Mesoamerica in general than in the Andean world. There were differences in met-
allurgy, writing systems, and social definition and hierarchy. But within the context of
world civilizations, it is probably best to view these two empires and the cultural areas
they represent as variations of similar patterns and processes, of which sedentary ag-
riculture is the most important. Basic similarities underlying the variations can also be
seen in systems of belief and cosmology and in social structure. Whether similar origins,
direct or indirect contact between the areas, or parallel development in Mesoamerica and §
the Andean area explains the similarity is unknown. But the American Indian civiliza-
tions shared much with each other; that factor and their isolation from external cultural
and biological influences gave them their peculiar character and their vulnerability. At
the same time, their ability to survive the shock of conquest and contribute to the forma-
tion of societies after conquest demonstrates much of their strength. Long after the Aztec
and Inca empires had ceased to exist, the peoples of the Andes and Mexico continued t0
draw on these cultural traditions. Ei}


--- End of Page 20 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 207

15 of g.5 The Other Peoples of the Americas
Char
What were the characteristic economic forms of American groups outside the two

xten: great imperial territories?

Oped Rather than seeing a division between “primitive” and “civilized” peoples in the Americas,
wplex itis more useful to consider gradations of material culture and social complexity. Groups
»v als such as the Incas had many things in common with the tribal peoples of the Amazon ba-
Over gin, such as the division into clans or halves—that is, a division of villages or communities
» best

into two major groupings with mutually agreed-upon roles and obligations. Moreover, as
we have seen, the diversity of ancient America forces us to reconsider ideas of human de-
velopment based on Old World examples. Social complexity, for example, was not nec-
essarily dependent on agriculture. In the Americas, some groups of fishers and hunters
and gatherers, such as the peoples of the northwest coast of the United States and British
Columbia, developed complex hierarchical societies. For those who see control of water for
agriculture as the starting point for political authority and the state, such societies as the
Pimas of Colorado and some of the chiefdoms of South America, who practiced irrigated
agriculture but did not develop states, also provide exceptions to theories based on Old
World evidence. Finally, archaeological finds in the Amazon now suggest that pottery and
agriculture may have developed there even before it did in the Andean region.

The civilizations of Mesoamerica and the Andes were high points of a Native Amer-
ican cultural achievement. However, the Americas continued to be occupied by a variety
of peoples who lived in different ways, ranging from highly complex sedentary agricul-
tural empires to simple kin-based bands of hunters and gatherers.

2 that
arlier
!ecess
ricul-
‘dthe
sh the
m.In
med
dom-
: state

8.5.1 How Many People?

Amajor issue that has fascinated students of the Americas for centuries is the question
of population size. For years after the European conquests, many observers discounted

‘grate the early descriptions of large and dense Indian populations as the exaggeration of con-

2d lo querors and missionaries who wanted to make their own exploits seem more impressive.

egion In the early twentieth century, the most repeated estimate of Native American popula-

paid. tion-about 1492 was 8.4 million (4 million in Mexico, 2 million in Peru, and 2.4 million

‘their in the rest of the hemisphere). Since that time, new archeological discoveries, a better

tiers. understanding of the impact of disease on indigenous populations, new historical and

coples demographic studies, and improved estimates of agricultural techniques and produc-
tivity have led to major revisions. Estimates still vary widely, and some have gone as

an Tes high as 112 million at the time of contact. Most scholars agree that Mesoamerica and

a the Andes supported the largest populations. Table 8.1 summarizes one of the most

ear: .

umelG Table 8.1 POPULATION ESTIMATE FOR THE WESTERN

ext of HEMISPHERE, 1492 _

areas. ———

'y ar 4 “a

Iso be North America:

igins, Mexico 21,400

aand Central America E 5,650

‘iliza- Caribbean 5,860

tural Andes. 41,500

ty. At ; Lowland South America 18,500

prema Total 67,300

Aztec

ed to SOURCES: William M. Deneven, The Native Population of the Americas in 1492 (1976), 289-292;

John D, Durand, “Historical Estimates of World Population,” Population and Development Review
3 (1967): 253-296; Russell Thornton, American Indian Holocaust and Survival (1 987).

--- End of Page 21 ---
208 = Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Table 8.2 WORLD POPULATION, c. 1500

Population’ iousands)

China 100,000-150,000
Indian subcontinent 75;000-150,000
Southwest Asia 20,000-30,000
Japan 2 15,000-20,000
Rest of Asia (except Russia) +8,000-30,000.
Europe (except Russia) 60,000-70,000
Russia (USSR) 10,000-18,000
Northern Africa 6,000-12,000
Rest of Africa .  30,000-60,000
Oceania . 4,000-2,000
Americas . Sea ~57,000-72,000-
Total : 389,000-61 4,000

i

SOURCES: William M. Deneven, The Native Population of the Americas in 1492 (1976), 289-292;
John D. Durand, “Historical Estimates of World Population,” Population and Development Review
3 (1957): 253-296; Russell Thornton, American Indian Holocaust and Survival (1987),

careful estimates, which places the total figure at more than 67 million, although a Native
American demographer has increased this figure to 72 million. Other scholars are still
unconvinced by these estimates.

These figures should be considered in a global context. In 1500, the population of
the rest of the world was probably about 500 million, of which China and India each |
had 75 million to 150 million people and Europe had 60 million to 70 million, a figure —
roughly equivalent to the population of the Americas (Table 8.2). If the modern estimates. _
are valid, the peoples of the Americas clearly made up a major segment of humanity.

8.5.2 Differing Cultural Patterns

Although it is impossible to summarize the variety of cultural patterns and lifeways
that existed in the Americas on the eve of contact with Europeans, we can describe the ’
major patterns outside the main civilization areas. Northern South America and part of ©
Central America were an intermediate area that shared many features with the Andes
and some with Mesoamerica and perhaps served as a point of cultural and material —
exchange between the two regions. In fact, with the exception of monumental architec:
ture, the intermediate zone chieftainships resembled the sedentary agriculture states in
many ways.
Similar kinds of chieftainships based on sedentary agriculture were found elsewhere
in the Americas. There is strong evidence of large chieftainships along the Amazon, where. |
the rich aquatic environment supported complex and perhaps hierarchical societies. —
The island Arawaks or Tainos encountered by Columbus on the Caribbean island of ©
Hispaniola were farmers organized in a hierarchical society and divided into chiefdoms.
These Indian chiefdom-level societies strongly resemble the societies of Polynesia. On the ~
bigger Caribbean islands, such as Hispaniola and Puerto Rico, chieftainships ruled over
dense populations, which lived primarily on the root crop manioc.
Agriculture was spread widely throughout the Americas by 1500. Some peoples, such
as those of the eastern North American woodlands and the coast of Brazil, combined ag-
riculture with hunting and fishing. Techniques such as slash-and-burn farming led to the
periodic movement of villages when production declined. Social organization in these 4
societies often remained without strong class divisions, craft specializations, or the de”
mographic density of people who practiced permanent, intensive agriculture. Unlike Eu
tope, Asia, and Africa, the Americas lacked nomadic herders. However, throughout the |

--- End of Page 22 ---
Chapter 8: The Americas 209

Americas, from Tierra del Fuego to the Canadian forests, some
people lived in small, mobile, kin-based groups of hunters and
gatherers. Their material culture was simple, and their societies
were more egalitarian.

Nowhere is Native American diversity more apparent than
in North America. In that vast continent, by 1500, perhaps as
many as 200 languages were spoken, and a variety of cultures
reflected Indian adaptation to different ecological situations.
By that time, most concentrated towns of the Mississippian
mound-builder cultures had been abandoned, and only a few
groups in southeastern North America still maintained the so-
cial hierarchy and religious ideas of those earlier cultures. In the
Southwest, descendants of the Anasazi and other cliff dwellers
had taken up residence in the adobe pueblos mostly along the

Rio Grande (Figure 8.7), bib they practiced terracing and ae Taos Pueblo, in the foothills of what is now New Mexico. The
gation to supp ort their agriculture. Their rich religious life, their pueblos of the Rio Grande valley were based on agriculture and
artistic ceramic and weaving traditions, and their agricultural the concentration of population in urban areas. This reflected a
base reflected their own historical traditions. number of the traditions of the older Native American cultures of
Elsewhere in North America, most groups were hunters _ the southwestem United States.
and gatherers or, like the Iroquois of the Northeast or the Nat- Michael Runkel/Superstock/Alamy Stock Photo
chez of the Southeast, combined those activities with some ag-
ticulture. Sometimes an environment was so rich that complex social organization and
artistic specialization could develop without an agricultural base. This was the case
among the Indians of the northwest coast, who depended on the rich resources of the
sea. In other cases, technology was a limiting factor. The tough prairie grasses could not
be farmed easily without metal plows, nor could the buffalo be hunted effectively before
Europeans introduced the horse. Thus, the Great Plains were only sparsely occupied.
Finally, we should note that although there was great variation among the Indian
cultures, some aspects stood in contrast to contemporary societies in Europe and Asia.
With the exception of the state systems of Mesoamerica and the Andes, most Indian so-
cieties were strongly kin-based. Communal action and ownership of resources, such as
land and hunting grounds, were emphasized, and material wealth often was disregarded
or placed in a ritual or religious context. It was not that these societies were necessarily
egalitarian but rather that ranking usually was not based on wealth, Although they were
often subordinate, women in some societies held important political and social roles and
usually played a central role in crop production. Indians tended to view themselves as
part of the ecological system and not in control of it, balancing their hunting or farming
with existing resources. These attitudes stood in marked contrast to those of many con-
temporary European and Asian civilizations. .

Figure 8.7

8.5.3 American Diversity in the World Context.

By the end of the fifteenth century, two great imperial systems had risen to dominate the
two major centers of civilization in Mesoamerica and the Andes. Both empires were built
on the achievements of their predecessors, and both reflected a militaristic phase in their
atea’s development. These empires proved to be fragile, weakened by internal strains
and the conflicts that any imperial system creates but also limited by their technological
inferiority.

The Aztec and Inca empires were one end of a continuum of cultures that went from
the most simple to the most complex. The Americas contained a broad range of societies,
fom great civilizations with millions of people to small bands of-hunters. In many of
these societies, religion played a dominant role in defining the relationship between peo-
ple and their environment and between the individual and society. How these societies


--- End of Page 23 ---
210 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

would have developed and what course the American civilizations might have taken in
continued isolation remain interesting and unanswerable questions. The first European
observers were simultaneously shocked by the “primitive” tribespeople and astounded _
by the wealth and accomplishments of civilizations such as that of the Aztecs. Europeans
generally saw the Indians as curiously backward. In comparison with Europe and Asia,
the Americas did seem strange—more like ancient Babylon or Egypt than contemporary
China or Europe—except that without the wheel, large domesticated animals, the plow,
and to a large extent metal tools and written languages, even that. comparison is mig
leading. The isolation of the Americas had remained important in physical and cultura!

terms, but that isolation came to an end in 1492, with disastrous results.

Global Connections and Central Themes

The Americas and the World

Conditions in the Americas before 1492 reveal the importance
of global connections in Afro-Eurasia and the absence of
such connections in the Americas. American isolation from
effective global connections is exhibited by the absence of
key technologies, like ironworking and the wheel, that would
have been easily transmitted had contacts been available.
American isolation shows in the absence of the standard
range of domesticated animals. It would show, tragically, in the
absence of any immunity to some of the common contagious
diseases of Afro-Eurasia.

‘The absence of several features that had become normal in

Afro-Eurasia must be stated carefully and should not detract from 3 4

the impressive economic, cultural, and political achievemeris

of the key American indian civilizations, including -their ability ;
(particularly in Mesoamerica) to sustain dense populations. The
absence of these features should not obscure the heritage of —
these societies to later patterns in the Americas. The comparative
distinctions that resulted from lack of wider contact would count ;
only when the Americas were forced into new global connections

after 1492 —but then they mattered greatly.

Further Readings !

an understanding of the Mesoamerican cosmology and his —

Charles C. Mann, 1491 (2005) provides a well-written over-
view of many aspects of Native American cultures and
accomplishments. Mary Miller, Art of Mesoamerica: From
Olmec to Aztec (2006) surveys evidence from archaeology
and art history. Friedrich Katz’s The Ancient Civilizations of
the Americas, 2nd revised ed. (1997) provides the best over-
all survey that compares Mesoamerica and Peru. It traces
the rise of civilization in both areas. Michael Coe et al.,
Atlas of Ancient America (1986), includes excellent maps,
illustrations, and an intelligent and comprehensive text.
The literature on the Aztecs continues to grow rapidly.
Bernardino de Sahagtin’s Florentine Codex: The General
History of the Things of New Spain, ed. and trans. Charles
Dibble and Arthur J. O. Anderson, 12 vols. (1950-1968),
is a fundamental source that most scholars still use as a
starting point. Good overviews are provided by Frances
Berdan’s The Aztecs of Central Mexico: An Imperial Society,
2nd ed. (2005), and Michael E. Smith, The Aztecs (2012).
Miguel Leon-Portilla’s Fifteen Aztec Poets (1992) deals
with religion and philosophy in a sympathetic way while
David Carrasco, in Religions of Mesoamerica: Cosmovision and
Ceremonial Centers (1990), tries to integrate archaeology into

City of Sacrifice (2000) puts religious violence into context.

Elizabeth Boone, Stories in Red and Black: Pictorial Histories —
of the Aztecs and Mixtecs (2000) discusses writing systems 3
while Ross Hassig, Aztec Warfare (1988), examines theit
military organization, and Inga Clendinnen, The Cost of
Courage in Aztec Society (2010), provides thoughtful essays
on their philosophy of war. Barbara Mundy, The Death of —
Aztec Tenochtitlan, the Life of Mexico City (2015) provides an —
urban, ecological, and architectural history of the capital —
city. Manuel Aguilar-Moreno, Handbook to Life in the Aztec —
World (2006), is a useful encyclopedia on many aspects of —

Aztec culture.

On Peru, a good overview through solid scholarly :

articles is provided in Richard W. Keatinge, ed., Peruviatt
Prehistory (1988). The article on Inca archeology by Craig
Morris is especially helpful. Also useful is Michael Moseley,

The Incas and Their Ancestors (1992). Art and archeology ate —
the focus of Rebecca Stone Miller, Art of the Andes from Chavin.
to Inca (1995). Maria Rostoworowski de Diez Canseco;

History of the Inca Realm (1996), integrates historical and
archeological sources, while Juan de Betanzos, Narrative of


--- End of Page 24 ---
the Incas (1996), makes a classic available to modern read-
1s, Terence D’altroy, The Incas (2002), integrates anthro-
4 logy and archaeology. John Murra’s classic The Economic
Erganization of the Inca State (1980) has influenced much
thinking about the Incas. J. Hyslop’s The Inca Road System
(1984) examines the building and function of the road net-
work, and Carolyn Dean, A Culture of Stone: Inka Perspectives
on Rock (2010) underlines the spiritual meaning of stones
and of construction in Inca culture. The work of Gary Urton,
The History of a Myth: Pacarigtambo and the Origin of the Inka
1990), and Frank Salomon, The Code Keepers (2004), on the
quipus show how ethnohistory is deepening our under-
standing of Inca society. Interesting social history is now be-
ing done. Irene Silverblatt’s Moon, Sun, and Witches: Gender
Ideologies and Class in Inca and Colonial Peru (1987) is a con-
troversial book on the position of women before, during,
and after the Inca rise to power. Richard L. Burger and Lucy
C. Salazasr, eds. Machu Picchu: Unveiling the Mystery of the
Incas (2004) provides studies of the most famous Inca arche-
ological site. Brian S. Bauer, The Development of the Inca State

(1996), offers an interpretation of government and rule.
In Geoffrey W. Conrad and Arthur A. Demerest’s Reli-

gion and Empire: The Dynamics of Aztec and Inca Expansionism

Chapter 8: The Americas 211

(1984), two archeologists compare the political systems of
the two empires and the motivations for expansion. The
authors find more similarities than differences. On the
native peoples who lived north of Mesoamerica there is
an extensive literature. Colin G. Calloway, One Vast Win-
ter Count (2003), provides an excellent and up-to-date
overview, while Linda Cordell, Ancient Pueblo Peoples
(1994), and George Miner, The Moundbuilders: Ancient
Peoples of Eastern North America (2004), provide more detail.
Carroll L. Riley, Becoming Aztlan: Mesoamerican Influence
in the Greater Southwest, AD 1200-1500 (2005) weighs the
evidence on the possible ties between Mesoamerica and the
Anasazi and other groups. Timothy R. Pauketat, Cahokia:
Ancient America’s Great City on the Mississippi (2009), is a
good starting point on Mississippian cultures that suggests
inspiration from Mesoamerica. Finally, on the question of
the populations of the Americas, see Noble D. Cook, Born
to Die (1998), which tries to establish the populations when
post-1492 contact took place, and Massimo Livi-Bacci,
Conquest: The Destruction of American Indios (2008) dismisses
monocausal explanations of Indian population decline
and discusses the size of indigenous populations before
conquest.

ing Questions

j. What were the strengths and weaknesses of the Aztec
Empire?

2. What were the main similarities and differences

between the Aztec and Inca empires?

3. What are the key issues involved in trying to under-
stand Aztec religious practices?

4, What were the most important differences between
Central American and Andean civilizations; and the
major societies of Africa, Asia, and Europe between
about 1200 and 1450?


--- End of Page 25 ---
Chapter 9

The World in 1450:
Changing Balance
of World Power

Contents and Learning Objectives

After reading each section, you should be able to answer these questions:

9.1 Key Changes in the Middle East

What were the most important changes occurring in the Middle East

by 1450?
92 The Structure of Transregional Trade

What caused the Chinese decision to abandon major expeditions?
93 The Rise of the West

What are the main issues in explaining new outreach from Western

Europe? What are the principal interpretations?

94 Outside the World Network

How did patterns in the Americas and Polynesia reflect their isolation

+ from main transregional trade networks?

Figure 9.1

Chinese junk, from a late sixteenth-
century Dutch print.

A Chinese Junk, illustration from ‘Jan
Huyghen van Linschoten, His Discourse
of Voyages into the East and West
Indies’, 1579-92 (engraving), Doetechum,
Johannes Baptista van, the Younger
(c.1560-1630)/Private Collection/
Bridgeman Images

213


--- End of Page 1 ---
214 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

THE COMPASS IS A SIMPLE ENOUGH device—something you can make yourself wig, 4
an iron needle and a magnet. Yet it was also a revolutionary device, allowing sailors (and a
now, airplane pilots) to maintain a sense of direction no matter how dark, stormy, foggy, i
or unfamiliar the environment. i
Although there has been debate about the origins of the compass, the instrument was)
clearly developed first by the Chinese. Chinese scientists may have had some knowledge “4
of magnetic principles as early as the first century. Actual compasses may have been de. ’

veloped during the Tang dynasty. They undoubtedly originated from the discovery of; ji
naturally magnetized iron, or lodestone, that could then be used to fashion a needle that

would point north. Some believe that the Chinese first used compasses in the practice of

arr
of

the forces of nature.

feng shui, a set of design principles by which people can align their living quarters with j

Compasses for navigation had been introduced by 1100. They were part of a growing
Chinese effort to make contact with sources of spices and teas in Southeast Asia. Prior to:
that point, Chinese seagoing had been confined to coastlines, but now it became much? =
more venturesome (Figure 9.1). Wide-ranging Chinese expeditions introduced the com 7.
pass to seafarers throughout the Indian Ocean, including Arab merchants, by the twelfth, A :
century. Europeans are first known to have used the compass in 1187. Europeans may.
have invented the compass separately, but it is far more likely that they learned about its
use as a result of contacts with Arabs or Asians.

The compass was fundamental to ambitious seagoing expeditions, like the great

stars, the compass would provide the guidance for Columbus’s travels to the Americas.
Even before this it began to change the shape of world history by facilitating dramatic
new contacts and exchanges. By the thirteenth century, various seagoing peoples—
Malaysians, for example, as well as Europeans—were introducing improvements in

}
{
:
Chinese voyages through the Indian Ocean. Along with observation of the sun and —
j
}
i
4
'
the compass, making it easier to read and more stable at sea. Italian navigators intro

:

duced the compass card, which involved placing the needle over a set of indicators.
Knowledge of the compass reached Scandinavia by 1300, a further step in the long pro-

cess of dissemination.

In 1400 the world was undergoing a profound transition. While there are a number of
elements involved, the decline of the Mongols was a key spur. Because the rise and con-
solidation of the Mongol Empire had produced such profound effects in Asia and Europe,
its gradual retreat inevitably had huge consequences. i

This chapter highlights the main changes taking shape by the early fifteenth century:
The principal focus is the shifting balance among civilizations in Asia, Africa, and Europe
and how these power shifts changed the nature of international contact.

This period of transition began with the decline of Arab strength—symbolized by
the fall of the last Arab caliphate in 1258—and the disruptions that Mongol incursions
caused elsewhere in Asia and Eastern Europe. These developments created new op
portunities in the Afro-Eurasian network that had been established during the previ-
ous centuries, initially under Arab sponsorship. Various candidates emerged to take
a new international leadership role once the Mongol Empire faded, including, for @
short time, Ming China. The Chinese expeditions showed the importance transregional

i
:
:
:
:
i
I
:
'
i

aa ne ea ro ome

--- End of Page 2 ---
With

a ee

}
}

contacts had acquired. The end of the expeditions, however, opened the way for new
alignments. Within the Middle East itself, Arab and then Mongol decline created new
4 portunities for Turkish conquerors and migrants. In 1453 the Ottoman Turks cap-
tured Constantinople, effectively completing the destruction of the Byzantine Empire
and creating a new Islamic political power. The Ottomans quickly established control
around much of the Black Sea, including the Balkans, and began to push southward
jnto Arab lands.

While the Ottomans would play some role in transregional trade, the most dy-
namic new contender for leadership ultimately proved to be Western Europe; the con-
ditions that propelled Western civilization into this new position around 1400 form
the second key theme of this chapter. The West was not yet a major power; it did not
replace the Arabs or Chinese as international leaders quickly or easily. The first stages
of the rise of the West were accompanied by important changes in Western civiliza-
tion itself, which were beginning to take shape by 1400. At this point, Italy, Spain, and
Portugal took the lead in Western European outreach, a lead that they would hold for
about two centuries.

It is also vital to note changes in societies outside the international network, in
the Americas and Polynesia. New difficulties in the great American empires, in partic-
ular, would reduce their ability to respond to the challenge of contact with Europeans
after 1492.

Focusing on new frameworks for international contacts, this chapter inevitably deals
with the question of why individual societies reacted differently to key forces. Compar-
ison is essential. Western Europe’s response, for example, should be compared to reac-
tions at the same time in regions like Japan or sub-Saharan Africa.

Amid variations and great change, the transitions around 1450 highlighted one im-
portant continuity as well: the importance of the level of contacts that had developed
through the formation of the transcontinental network. A variety of societies in Africa,
Asia, and Europe depended on far-flung trade relations, and when one exchange net-
work collapsed-—as with the decline in travel security overland when the Mongol em-
pires faded—another system quickly moved into place. Not only trade, but continued
exchanges of technology and ideas, continued to mark Afro-Eurasian relationships
during the fifteenth century.

Black Death spreads in
Europe and Russia

See ia Resend
1258 1304-1374 1368 1400
_ Mongol conquest of Life of Petrarch; development | Mongols expelled from End of Polynesian migrations
Baghdad; fall of Abbasid of Italian Renaissance China; Ming dynasty 1408-1433
penne 1320s a Chinese trading expeditions
©. 1266~1337 Spread of bubonic plague 1439
- - Life of Giotto (Black Death) in Gobi desert Portugal takes over Azores:
1275-1292 1320s increasing expeditions into
Marco Polo in China First European use of cannon Atlantic and along Northwest
1290-1317 in warfare African coast
-Famines in Europe | 1830s *
1291 Black Death reaches China
Fitst tain expedition seeks | 1347
Toute to Indies Black Death reaches Sicily
1348
Peak of Black Deaih in
Middle East
1348-1375

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 215

1453

Ottomans capture
Constantinople, fall of
Byzantine Empire

1469
Union of Aragon and Castile;
rise of Spanish monarchy


--- End of Page 3 ---
216 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

9.1 Key Changes in the Middle East |
|

What were the most important changes occurring in the Middle East by 1450?

The new world order that was beginning to emerge by 1400 first involved major reshuf
fling in the Middle East and North Africa. Developments occurred in various aspects of }
society, and some of them are not easy to explain. y
Culture shifted, along with politics, in this crucial region. An earlier tension in phi-
losophy and the arts yielded to the predominance of the Islamic faith. The new Piety —
associated with the rising Sufi movement, discussed in Chapter 5, contributed to a ney
religious emphasis. In literature, attention to secular themes, such as the joys of feasting”
and hunting, gave way to more strictly religious ideas. The same shift occurred in phi
losophy, with new attacks on the idea of combining faith with reason. Thus Al-Ghazali
in a book revealingly titled The Destruction of the Philosophers, claimed. to use Aristotle's’
logic to show that it was imposible to discover religious truth by human reason. Many =
Sufi scholars wrote excitedly of their mystical contacts with God and the stages of their
religious passion. Islamic science continued, but its role diminished. q
Changes in society and the economy were as telling as the shifts in politics and in:
tellectual life. As the authority of the caliphate declined, landlords seized power over th
peasantry. As a result, from about 1100 onward, Middle Eastern peasants increasingly lost _
their freedom, becoming serfs on large estates, providing the labor and produce landlords —
sought. This loss was not the peasants’ alone, for agricultural productivity suffered as a re-
sult. Landlords turned to sucking what they could from their estates rather than trying to
develop a more vital agriculture. Tax revenues declined, and Arab and other Middle Eastern
traders began to lose ground. Few Arab coins have been found in Europe dating from later i
than 1100. European merchants began to control their own turf and challenge the Arabs in
:
|
|

other parts of the Mediterranean, gaining increasing initiative in this vital trading area.

Arab decline was gradual and incomplete. The reduced dynamism in trade did not
take the Arabs out of major world markets, for example. Indeed, Middle Eastern com-
merce rebounded somewhat by 1400.

Finally, the political fragmentation of the Arab world did not produce prolonged
confusion in the Middle East or in the religion of Islam. The emerging Ottoman Turk
ish state soon mastered many of the lands of the old caliphate as well as the Byzantine
corner, expanding into Southeastern Europe. The new empire gave renewed vitality to
Islamic politics, and it would soon be joined by two other Islamic empires, in Persia and
India. (See Chapter 15 for the development of the Ottoman Empire.) It is important to
realize that the empire was far more powerful, politically and militarily, than the caliph-
ate had been for many centuries. It was thus more challenging to rivals in neighboring
civilizations such as Western Europe or Russia.

9.2 The Structure of Transregional Trade

What caused the Chinese decision to abandon major expeditions?

Even the rise of the Ottoman Empire would not restore the full international vigor that
the Islamic caliphate had wielded had at the height of its powers. The empire did not be
come the sole hub of an international network, as the caliphate had been a few centuries
before. By the fifteenth century, merchants from many societies were competing for roles
in transregional trade. In the Mediterranean, Europe, and particularly Italy, merchants
were increasingly active. In the Indian Ocean, merchants from India and Southeast Asia,
most of them Muslims, rivaled Arab activity.

The big issue in the fifteenth century, however, involved the aftermath of the Mongol
era. For 150 years, the interlocking Mongol states had facilitated overland trade betwee

coe

Oc
trit

--- End of Page 4 ---
vw

5

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 217

China, the Middle East, and Europe. Essentially, this Mongol system had replaced earlier
Arab leadership in facilitating transregional trade. But the Mongol defeat in China, late
in the fourteenth century, and new pressure on Mongol rulers in Russia and elsewhere
unraveled this system. Overland travel became more difficult and dangerous without
Mongol political protection. Trade and its motivations did not diminish in importance,
put inevitably new emphasis focused on seagoing routes, particularly in the Indian
Ocean. Two societies, first China and then Europe, sought to take advantage of the op-

portunities involved.

9.2.1 Chinese Outreach and Reconsideration

For a brief time China asserted new leadership in international trade. This activity
reflected earlier gains in Chinese shipping, and China’s long-standing focus on manufac-
turing for export. Rebellions in China drove out the deeply resented Mongol overlords
in 1368. A rebel leader from a peasant family, Zhu Yuanzhang (joo wan-jang), seized the
Mongol capital of Beijing and proclaimed a new Ming—meaning “brilliant’”—dynasty
that was to last until 1644. The dynasty began with a burst of unusual expansionism.
The initial Ming rulers pressed to secure the borders of the Middle Kingdom. This meant
pushing the Mongols far to the north, to the plains of what is now Mongolia. It meant rees-
tablishing influence over neighboring governments and winning tribute payments from
states in Korea, Vietnam, and Tibet, reviving much of the East Asian regional structure set
up by the Tang dynasty. Far more unusual was a new policy, adopted soon after 1400, of
mounting huge, state-sponsored trading expeditions to Southern Asia and beyond.

A first fleet sailed in 1405 to India, with 62 ships carrying 28,000 men. Later voyages
reached the Middle East and the eastern coast of Africa, bringing chinaware and copper
coinage in exchange for local goods. Chinese shipping at its height consisted of 2,700
coastal vessels, 400 armed naval ships, and at least as many long-distance ships. Nine
great treasure ships, the most sophisticated in the world at the time, explored the Indian
Ocean, the Persian Gulf, and the Red Sea, establishing trade connections but also seeking
tribute payments all along the way.

Between 1405 and their termination in 1433, these expeditions were commanded by the
admiral Zheng He. A Muslim from Western China, Zheng He was well suited to deal with
Muslims in Southeast Asia on the Indian Ocean trade route. Zheng He was also a eunuch,
castrated for service at the royal court. China’s Ming emperors retained a large harem of
wives to ensure succession, and eunuchs were needed to guard them without threat of sex-
ual rivalry; many gained bureaucratic powers well beyond this service. Zheng He’s expe-
ditions usually hugged the coastline, but he had an improved compass and excellent maps
as well as huge vessels that contained ample supplies—even gardens—as well as goods
for trade. His fleets must have impressed, even terrified, the local rulers around the Indian
Ocean, many of whom paid tribute to the emperor. For even though Zheng He brought
gifts, he also had well-armed troops on his expéditions. Several missions visited China from
the Middle Hast and Africa. From Africa also came ostriches, zebras, and giraffes for the im-
Petial 200; the latter became the unicoms of Chinese fable. But Zheng He was resented by
the Confucian bureaucrats, who refused even to write much about him in their chronicles.

There is no question that the course of world history might have been changed dra-
matically had the Chinese thrust continued, for the tiny European expeditions that began to
“ep down the western coast of Africa at about the same time would have been no match
for this combination of merchant and military organization. Indeed, historians wonder if one
®xpedition might have rounded Africa to at least glimpse the Atlantic. But China’s emperors
called the expeditions to a halt in 1433. The bureaucrats had long opposed the new trade
Policy, out of rivalry with other officials such as Zheng He, but there were deeper reasons
m well. The costs seemed unacceptable, given the continuing expenses of the campaigns
“gainst the Mongols and a further commitment to build a more massive protective wall in

Zheng He

[jehng huh] Chinese Muslim
admiral who commanded

a series of Indian Ocean,
Persian Gulf, and Red Sea trade
expeditions under third Ming
emperor, Yunglo, between 1405
and 1433,


--- End of Page 5 ---
218 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

the north, while also establishing a luxurious new capital city in Beijing. A young emperp,
also wanted to differentiate his policies from those of his predecessor. So the expeditions —

ground to an abrupt halt. This was a crucial shift. It reflected a preference for traditional ex.

penditures rather than distant foreign involvements. Chinese merchant activity continued tom
be extensive in Southeast Asia. Chinese trading groups established permanent settlements in
the Philippines, Malaysia, and Indonesia, where they added to the cultural diversity of the #
area and maintained a disproportionate role in local and regional trading activities into the
twentieth century. And manufacturing levels remained high. Nonetheless, China’s chance tp —
become a dominant world trading power was lost, at least for several centuries. =|
One result, today, is an interesting challenge to interpretation. To Western eyes,
accustomed to judging a society’s dynamism by its ability to reach out and gain news
territories or trade positions, China’s decision may seem hard to understand—the pre
cursor to decline. But to the Chinese, it was the ambitious expeditionary flurry that wag
unusual, not its end. China’s leaders were suspicious of any policy that would unduly.
elevate commercial activity as opposed to rule by the scholar-gentry. Ming emperors —
consolidated their rule over the empire’s vast territory. Internal economic development
continued as well, with no need for foreign products save for goods from Southeast Asia.
Moreover, Chinese products continued to be highly valued in the world market. Indus. _
try expanded, with growth in the production of textiles and porcelain; ongoing trade
with Southeast Asia enriched the port cities; agricultural production and population i
creased. The end of the expeditions had no immediate downsides for China itself.
The shift in Chinese policy unintentionally cleared the way for another, in most ways ;
less organized, civilization to work toward a new international position. With the Arabs in
partial eclipse and with China retreating from its brief initiative, hesitant Western expan-
sionism, ventured before 1400, began to take on new significance. Within a century, Western
explorers and traders had launched an attempt to seize international trading dominance and
had expanded the international network to include parts of the Americas for the first time.

9.3 The Rise of the West

What are the main issues in explaining new outreach from Western Europe? What are
the principal interpretations?

|
)
The West’s gradual emergence into larger world contacts during the fifteenth century t
was surprising in many respects. Western expansion had numerous causes, and it must i
be seen as a result of growing problems as well as new strengths. }

Westerners remained awed by the powerful bureaucracies and opulent treasuries of
empires in the traditional civilization centers such as Constantinople. Furthermore, the
West was changing in some painful ways. Key features of medieval culture and society
were being questioned by 1400. The church, which had long been one of the organiz-
ing institutions of Western civilization, was under new attack. Medieval philosophy had )
passed its creative phase. Warrior aristocrats, long a key leadership group in feudal so- t
ciety, softened their style of life, preferring court rituals and jousting tournaments and
adopting military armor so cumbersome that real fighting was difficult.

Even more strikingly, the lives and economic activities of ordinary Europeans were in
disarray. This was a time of crisis, and Europe’s expanding world role could not reverse the
fundamental challenges to its internal economic and demographic structure. Europeats
began to suffer from recurrent famine after 1300 because population outstripped the food ;
supply and no new food production techniques were discovered. Famine reduced disease |
resistance, making Europe more vulnerable to the bubonic plagues that spread from Asia
Bubonic plague, or Black Death, surfaced in various parts of Asia in the fourteenth cet” '
tury. In China it reduced the population by nearly 30 percent by 1400. Following trade ;
routes, it then spread into India and the Middle East, causing thousands of deaths per day j

by?

--- End of Page 6 ---
Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 219

in the larger cities. The plague’s worst European impact occurred between 1348 and 1375,

a py which time 30 million people, one-third of Europe's population, died. As we have seen,

lex the resulting economic dislocation produced bitter strikes and peasant uprisings.

edto : . Lye

asin 93.1 Sources of Dynamism: Medieval Vitality

tthe How, in this context, could the West be poised for a new global role? The answer to that

0 the uestion is complex. A number of different interpretations deserve attention, although

eto some might be blended. First, several key advances that had taken shape in European
society were not really reversed by the troubles of the decades around 1400. For exam-

2yes, ple, the strengthening of feudal monarchy provided more effective national or regional

ae wernments for much of the West. The Hundred Years’ War between Britain and France

Py stimulated innovations in military organization, including nonaristocratic soldiers re-

wes cruited and paid directly by the royal government, that enhanced central political power.

duly — Strong regional monarchies took hold in parts of Spain and in Portugal as Christian lead-

To ers drove back the Muslim rulers of this region. The growth of cities and urban economies

met continued to spur the commercial side of Western society. Even the church had made its

Asia. peace with such key principles of capitalism as profit-seeking. Technology continued to

dus, advance, particularly in ironwork—used for bells and weapons—and timekeeping.

Tade In short, explaining the new Western vigor involves an understanding that some of

nn the gains the West achieved during the previous centuries continued even as certain tra-

J ditional forms wavered.

ways

u . .

oa 9.3.2 Imitation and Commercial Problems

stem ‘Two additional factors affected Western Europe’s international position, one a clear plus, the

eand © other a growing problem. New opportunities for imitation were an obvious advantage. The

ne Mongol state established in Asia and Eastern Europe in the late thirteenth and early four-

Q teenth centuries provided new access to Asian knowledge and technology. Political stability

33 and an openness to foreign visitors by the great khans helped Westerners learn of Asian

technologies, ranging from printing to the compass and explosive powder. Western Europe

had ideal access in the Mongol period. It was not disrupted by the Mongols, as Eastern Eu-

tare rope and so many parts of Asia were, but it was in active contact, unlike sub-Saharan Africa.

Internal European warfare and merchant zeal made Western Europe an eager learner, for
the Asian technologies promised to respond to both military and commercial needs.

vtury |
must 7 The second international factor was the intensification of European deficiencies in the

; existing world market and international arena. From the Crusades onward, Western elites
ies of ©
>the «os
ciety Visualizing the Past
niz- .o .
‘had Population Trends
iso: F Revi Q tion:
vand | Percentages of Total World Population eview Guestion:

e . 1. These population charts show relationships in
wre int population size, and comparative trends in population
ethe | q 000: =: uU size, among the major inhabited regions of the world.
eans Europe 12,2 19.6 16.3 Population pressure did not drive European expansion in
food Asia 62.9 67.6 59.8 59.2 the fifteenth century, because the population was falling
Pe q Africa 41.2 10.0 68 99 temporarily, but there were longer-term trends, from the
re, 3 Americas 134 24 27 8.9 14.0 year 1000, that might have encouraged the expansionist
cen q Oceania an 04 on ne 0.6 effort. The chart allows comparison, showing what

regions experienced the greatest changes in population

4
rade A SOURCE: Based on Wrong, Dennis H. Population and Society, 4th Edition. levels between 1000 and 1800. What might have caused
day 7 New York: Random House, Inc., 1977.


--- End of Page 7 ---
220. Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

these changes? Finally, the chart extends comparisons
into the later twentieth century.

2. Reading population statistics provides vital information, but
it also raises questions, including ones about causation,

which numbers alone cannot answer. What other data Would 4
be most helpful to put these figures in appropriate world SI
history contexts? Which figures are more revealing: absolute. 2
numbers or percentages? Why? r

Population Levels (Millions)

se

Europe 36
Asia (includes Middle East) 485
Africa 33
Americas 39
Oceania (includes Australia) 16
Totals 294.5

2.25
611.25

180 890 635

625 970 2300
70 110 385
24 145 545
25 675 23
901.5 1621.75 3888

NOTE: Earlier figures are only estimates; they are fairly accurate indicators of relative size.
SOURCE: Based_on Wrong, Dennis H. Population and Society, 4th Edition, New York: Random House, Inc,, 1977.

had become used to increasing consumption of Asian luxury products, including spices :
such as cinnamon and nutmeg, silks, sugar, perfumes, and jewels. In exchange for the hn _
ury items, Europeans mainly had cruder goods to offer: wool, tin, copper, honey, and salt,
The value of European exports almost never equaled the value of what was imported from
Asia. The resulting unfavorable balance of trade had to be made up in gold, but Western —
Europe had only a limited gold supply. By 1400, the constant drain to Asia was creating —
a gold famine that threatened the whole European economy with collapse. Furthermore,
there were legitimate concerns about a new Muslim threat. The Ottoman Empire was tak-
ing shape, and Europeans began to fear a new Muslim surge. Even before this, the Muslim
capture of the last crusader stronghold (the city of Acre in the Middle East) in 1291 gave
Muslim traders, particularly Egyptians, new opportunities to act as intermediaries in the
Asian trade, for there were no Western-controlled ports left in the Eastern Mediterranean.
One response to this was a series of conquests by the city-state of Venice along the eastem
coast of the Adriatic Sea. A more important response was to begin exploring alternative

routes to Asia that would bypass the Middle East and the feared and hated Muslim realms.

In sum: One explanation for Europe's new activity would emphasize the gains made in the
later postclassical centuries, particularly in terms of urban and commercial growth, despite
population setbacks. These gains could now be combined with new technologies learned from
Asia—especially weaponry. The final ingredient was the realization that innovations were es: _
sential to meet balance-of-payment problems and concerns about reliance on Muslim traders.

This explanation may not be entirely adequate, and it certainly is not the explanation
preferred by most European historians. They turn—sometimes exclusively—to another
set of factors: cultural developments within Europe that would then spill outward.

Document
Bubonic Plague

The spread of the plague in the fourteenth century, affecting
major parts of Asia, the Middle East and Egypt, and Europe,
was one of the great devastations in world history. Muslim
and Christian observers described the plague and reactions
to it. Ibn al-Wardi was a Muslim scholar who died of the
plague in 1349; Jean de Venette was a monk who died
in 1368.

lon Al-Wardi

vant? Oh God, pray for our master, Muhammad, and givé
him peace. Save us for his sake from the attacks of the
plague and give us shelter.

i
i
i
God is my security in every adversity. My sufficiency is
in God alone. Is not God sufficient protection for His se”
I
a |
a

--- End of Page 8 ---
F)

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 221

The plague frightened and killed. It began in the land
of darkness. Oh, what a visitor! It has been current for
fifteen years. China was not preserved from it nor could
the strongest fortress hinder it. The plague afflicted the
Indians of India. It weighted upon the Sind. It seized with
its hand and ensnared even the lands of the Uzbeks. The
plague destroyed mankind in Cairo. Its eye was cast upon
Egypt, and behold, the people were wide-awake. It stilled
all movement in Alexandria. The plague did its work like
a silkworm....

Then, the plague turned to Upper Egypt. It, also, sent
forth its storm to Barqah. The plague attacked Gaza, and
it shook ‘Asqalan severely. The plague oppressed Acre.
The scourge came to Jerusalem and paid the zakat [with
the souls of men]. It overtook those people who fled to the
al-‘Aqsa Mosque, which stands beside the Dome of the
Rock. If the door of mercy had not been opened, the end
of the world would have occurred in a moment. It then
hastened its pace and attacked the entire maritime plain.
The plague trapped Sidon and descended unexpectedly
upon Beirut, cunningly.

This plague is for the Muslims a martyrdom and a re-
ward, and for the disbelievers a punishment and a rebuke.
When the Muslim endures misfortune, then patience is
his worship. It has been established by our Prophet: God
bless him and give him peace, that the plague-stricken
are martyrs. This noble tradition is true and assures mar-
tyrdom. And this secret should be pleasing to the true
believer. If someone says it causes infection and destruc-
tion, say: God creates and recreates. If the liar disputes the
maiter of infection and tries to find an explanation, | say
that the Prophet, on him be peace, said: who infected
the first? If we acknowledge the ptague’s devastation of
the people, it is the will of the Chosen Doer. So it hap-
pened again and again....

Among the benefits... is the removal of one’s hopes
and the improvement of his earthly works. It awakens
men from their indifference for the provisioning of their
final journey. °

Nothing prevented us from running away from the
Plague except our devotion to the noble tradition. Come
then, seek the aid of God Almighty for raising the plague,
for He is the best helper. Oh God, we call You better
than anyone did before. We call You to raise from us the
Pestilence and plague. We do not take refuge in its remov-
al other than with You. We do not depend on our good
heaith against the Plague but on you. We seek your pro-
tection, oh Lord of creation, from the blows of this stick.

SOURCE: Michael Dols. “Ibn Al-Wardi's Risalah Al-Naba ‘An Al-Waba’, A
Translation of @ Major Source for the History of the Black Death in the
Middle East.” in Near Eastern Numisamates, tconography, Epigraphy,
and History: Studies in Honor of George ©. Miles. Edited by Dikran

kK. Kouymjian (Beruit: American University of Beirut, 1974), 443-445.
Printed by permission of The American University of Beirut Press.

Rey

Jean de Venette

This sickness or pestilence was called an epidemic by
the doctors. Nothing like the great numbers who died
in the years.1348 and 1349 has been heard of or seen
or read of in times past. This plague and disease came
from ymaginatione or association and contagion, for if a
well man visited the sick he only rarely avoided the risk
of death. Wherefore in many towns timid priests with-
drew, leaving the exercise of their ministry to such of the
religious as were more daring.... A very great number
of the saintly sisters of the Hétel-Dieu who, not fearing
to die, nursed the sick in all sweetness and humility,
with no thought of honor, a number too often renewed
by death, rest in peace with Christ, as we may piously
believe.

Some sai¢ that this pestilence was caused by infec-
tion of the air and waters, since there was at this time no
famine nor lack of food supplies, but on the contrary great
abundance. As a result of this theory of infected water
and air as the source of the Plague the Jews were sud-
denly and violently charged with infecting wells and water
and corrupting the air. The whole world rose up against
them cruelly on this account. In Germany and other parts
of the worid where Jews lived, they were massacred and
slaughtered by Christians, and many thousands were
burned everywhere, indiscriminately...

But woe is me! the world was not changed for the
better but for the worse. ... For men were more avaricious
and grasping than before, even though they had far greater
Possessions. They were more covetous and disturbed
each other more frequently with suits, brawls, disputes
and pleas. Nor by the mortality resulting from this terrible
plague inflicted by God was peace between kings and
lords established. And this fact was very remarkable. Al-
though there was an abundance of all goods, yet every-
thing was twice as dear, whether it were utensils, victuals,
or merchandise, hired helpers or peasants and serfs, ex-
cept for some hereditary domains which remained abun-
dantly stocked with everything. Charity began to cool,
and iniquity with ignorance and sin to abound, for few
could be found in the good towns and castles who knew
how or were willing to instruct children in the rudiments
of grammar....

SOURCE: “From The Chronicle of Jean de Venetie”, translated by Jean
Birdsall, edited by Richard A. Newhall. Copyright © 1953 Columbia
University Press, Reprinted with permission of the publisher.

Review Questions:

1. How did Christian and Muslim reactions compare?

2. Did the reactions suggest that the plague might have
different results in the Middle East and in Europe?

3. How did the plague relate to other major developments
toward the end of the postclassical period?


--- End of Page 9 ---
222 Part ll: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Renaissance

[REHN-uh-sahns] Cultural and
political movement in Western
Europe; began in Italy c. 1400;
rested on urban vitality and
expanding commerce; featured
literature and art with distinctly
more secular priorities than
those of the Middle Ages.

Francesco Petrarch

[PEE-trahrk] (1304-1374) One of

the major literary figures of the

Western Renaissance; an Italian
author and humanist.

9.3.3 Secular Directions in the Italian Renaissance

A further set of significant changes in Europe started in Italy, partly because git.
ies were livelier and more independent in this region than in the north. In 1499

Italy was in the midst of the vital cultural and political movement known as the _
Renaissance, or rebirth—referring to revival of styles and themes from classicaj
Greece and Rome. The early phases of the Renaissance stressed more secular sub.

jects in literature and art. Religious art remained dominant but used more realistic

portrayals of people and nature, and some nonreligious themes surfaced outright —
(Figure 9.2). The doings of human beings deserved attention for their own sake, in —
the Renaissance view, not merely as they reflected a divine plan. Artists and writers _
became more openly ambitious for personal reputation and glory. Italy also served
as the center of initial Renaissance culture because it had more contact with Roman sj
tradition than did the rest of Europe and because by the fourteenth century it led the _

West in banking and trade.

9.3.4 Renaissance Culture

Although it had political and commercial roots in Italian cities, the Renaissance was

first and foremost a cultural movement, launched in Florence and manifesting itself _

in literature and various arts (Figure 9.3). The Renaissance focused on a new interest

in stylistic grace and a concern for practical ethics and codes of behavior for urban
gentlemen. One leading fourteenth-century writer, Francesco Petrarch, not only took —
pride in his city and his age but explored the glories of personal achievement with new

confidence.

Figure 9.2

Europe’s new spirit amid old values. Dante, an Italian writer of the fourteenth ceniury, holds a copy of
his great work, the Divine Comedy, with both religious (souls tormented in hell) and Renaissance (the

solid, classical-styfe urban buildings of the city of Florence) symbolism greeting him. The painting was
designed by Domenico di Michelina for the cathedral of Florence in 1465.

Album/Alamy Stock Photo

G
i
2
i
BS)
z
$

__ =e

--- End of Page 10 ---
Chapier 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 223

Figure 9.3

‘cit.

400,

the

sical

sub-

listic

tight

2, in

‘iters

tved

‘man

J the

was

itself

‘erest

ban

took — Although the nave of Florence Cathedral was completed in the fourteenth century, it was not until

inew E the fifteenth century that architect Filippo Brunelleschi was able to solve the engineering challenge
presented by the plan for the massive dome. In order to eliminate the need for temporary wooden
scaffolding during construction, Brunelleschi used a skeleton of eight large ribs alternated with eight
pairs of thinner ribs, all tied together by nine sets of horizontal ties, all of which would be able to support

— the workers as the dome was raised.

: MasterLu/Fotolia

Innovation flourished in the visual arts and music as well. The subject matter of art
moved toward nature and people, including cityscapes and portraits of the rich and pow-
erful, whether the themes were religious or secular. Florentine painter Giotto (gee-YAW-
toh) led the way, departing from medieval formalism and stiffness. While still a young
apprentice to the painter Cimabue (chee-mah-BOO-eh), Giotto painted a fly on the nose
of one of Cimabue’s portrait subjects, and it was so realistic that Cimabue repeatedly
tried to swat it off before going back to work on the canvas. Other painters, beginning
later in the fourteenth century, started to introduce perspective while using new colors
and other materials. In architecture, favor shifted away from the Gothic to a classicism
derived from the styles of Greece and Rome. Vivid, realistic statues complemented the
ew palaces and public buildings. 4

The impact of the early Renaissance must not be exaggerated. It had little influence
Outside of Italy. Even in Italy, it focused on high culture, not popular culture, and on the
arts; there was little initial interest in science. And although it built on distinctive political
and economic forms, it was not a full break from medieval tendencies.

Nevertheless, these new cultural currents were an important innovation in West-
em history. The full ramifications of the Renaissance feed into the next period of both
world and Western history (see Chapter 11). The movement was only getting started
by 1400. However, the wide range of Italian commerce and shipping proved to be one

di Of the building blocks of European outreach. By the fifteenth century, ships, particu-
of : a from the western Italian city of Genoa, which was less well placed than Venice
oa t Eastern Mediterranean trade and the resultant links to Asia, were ready for new
a Toles, Ambitious city-state governments encouraged new ventures, eager to collect
a More fax money and promote commerce as one of their explicit functions. A general

“Renaissance spirit” could also spur innovation. Whereas people such as Petrarch


--- End of Page 11 ---
224 Part I: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Castile and Aragon
Regional kingdoms of the
Tberian peninsula; pressed
reconquest of the peninsula
from Muslims and ultimately
united under the Spanish
monarchy.

Vivaldis

Two Genoese brothers

who attempted to find a
western route to the “Indies”;
disappeared in 1291; precursors.

of thrust into southern Atlantic.

Vasco da Gama

Portuguese captain who sailed
for India in 1497; established
early Portuguese dominance in
Indian Ocean.

defined human ambition mainly in cultural terms, other urban and commercial lead.
ers, including seafarers such as Christopher Columbus of Genoa, might apply some of
the same confidence and desire for personal glory to different areas, such as explora.
tion or conquest. -

9.3.5 The Iberian Spirit of Religious Mission

i
f
:
{
:
i
Along with Italy, a key center for change by the fourteenth century was the Iberian Pen.
insula, where Christian military leaders had for several centuries been pressing back the )
boundaries of the Muslim state in Spain. Soon after 1400, major regional monarchies had, i
been established in the provinces of Castile and Aragon, which would be united throug
royal marriage in 1469. .

Even before the marriage between Ferdinand and Isabella, Spanish and Por-
tuguese rulers had developed a vigorous military and religious agenda. They sup- —
ported effective armies, including infantry and noble cavalry. And they believed
that government had a mission to promote Christianity by converting or expelling — 4
Arabs and Jews and by maintaining doctrinal purity within the church. Close links ;
between church and state, portrayed in art, provided revenues and officials for the —
royal government. In return, the government supported church courts in their efforts
to enforce moral and doctrinal purity. Later in the fifteenth century, this interaction —
led to the reestablishment of the church-run courts of the Inquisition in Spain, de-
signed to enforce religious orthodoxy. In other words, Spain and Portugal were de-
veloping effective new governments with a special sense of religious mission and
religious support. These changes most directly promoted the West's expansion into
wider world contacts.

9.3.6 The First Phases of Western Expansion

As early as 1291, two Italian brothers, the Vivaldis from Genoa, sailed with two galleys
through the Straits of Gibraltar, seeking a western route to the “Indies,” the
spice-producing areas of South and Southeast Asia. They were never heard from again.
Although they were precursors of a major western thrust into the southern Atlantic, it is
not even entirely clear what they meant by the “Indies.” Early in the fourteenth century,
other explorers from Genoa rediscovered the Canary Islands, in the Atlantic, populated
by a hunting and gathering people. These islands had been known vaguely since clas-
sical times but had never been explored by Europeans. Genoese sailors also visited the
Madeiras and probably reached the more distant Azores by 1351. Soon after this, ships
from Northeastern Spain, based in the port of Barcelona, sailed along the African coast a8
far south as present-day Sierra Leone.

Until 1430, technological barriers prevented further exploration for alternative
routes. Without adequate navigation instruments, Europeans could not risk wider
ventures into the Atlantic. They also needed better ships than the shallow-drafted,
oar-propelled Mediterranean galleys. However, efforts were underway to develop au
oceangoing sailing vessel. At the same time, the crucial navigational problems wet
met by the compass and the astrolabe, used to determine latitude at sea by reckoning
from the stars. Contacts with Arab merchants and with the Chinese provided
knowledge of these devices. European mapmaking, which improved steadily during
the fourteenth century, was another key innovation. Because of these advances, a
well as mistaken geographic assumptions shown on the map in Figure 9.4, Europe
ans were ready in the decades after 1400 to undertake voyages that were impossible
just a century before. In 1498, the Portuguese explorer Vasco da Gama became the
first European to reach India by sea, preparing for Portuguese entry into the Indian
Ocean (Figure 9.5).

|
'

|
'
:
'

Fi

--- End of Page 12 ---
Pen-

k the —

shad
ugh

Por-
sup-

aved 5
lling
links ~

r the
‘forts
ction
i, de-
e de-
tand

vinto |

Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 225

Columbus is supposed to have had a capy ‘6f this world map in Spain. The map, dating from about
1489, shows the Old World as Europeans were increasingly coming to know it. Note how reachable
India looked to Europeans using this map—although, of course, they had to go around Africa.

PBL Collection/Alamy Stock Photo

93.7 Colonial Patterns

Even as these wider-ranging voyages began, westerners, led by the Spanish and Por-
fuguese, had begun to take advantage of the new lands they had already discovered. A
driving force behind both the further expeditions and the efforts to make already dis-
covered areas economically profitable was Prince Henry of Portugal, known as Henry
the Navigator. A student of astronomy and nautical science, Henry sponsored about
a third of Portuguese voyages of exploration before his death in 1460. His mixture of
motivations—scientific and intellectual curiosity, desire to spread the name of Christ
to unfamiliar lands, and financial interest—reflected some of the key forces in late
Postclassical Europe. .

Portugal by 1439 had taken control of the Azores and had granted land to colonists.
Soon Spaniards and Portuguese had conquered and colonized the Madeiras and Canar-
ies, bringing in Western plants, animals, weapons, and diseases. The result was some-
thing of a laboratory for the larger European colonialism that would soon take shape,

Particularly in the Americas. European colonists quickly set up large agricultural estates

designed to produce cash crops that could be sold on the European market. First they
introduced Sugar, an item once imported from Asia but now available in growing quanti-
Hes from Western-controlled sources. Ultimately, other crops such as cotton and tobacco
Were also introduced to the Atlantic islands. To produce these market crops, the new
colonists brought in slaves from Northwestern Africa, mainly in Portuguese ships—the
frst examples of a new, commercial version of slavery and the first sign that Western ex-
Parsion could have serious impact on other societies as well., oe :

These developments around 1400 remained modest, even in their consequences for

ica, They illustrate mainly how quickly Western conquerors decided what to, do with. 8

Henry the Navigator
Portuguese prince responsible
for the direction of a series of
expeditions along the African
coast in the fifteenth century;
marked the beginning of
Western European expansion.


--- End of Page 13 ---
226 Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

Figure 9.5

lands and peoples newly in their grasp. The ventures y were i
successful enough to motivate more extensive probes j into.

the southern Atlantic as soon as technology permitted, Ine

were being fully settled.

Finally, these early ventures summed up the swirl of Z
forces that were beginning to reshape the West's role in the
world: inferiorities and fears, particularly with regard to _
the Muslims; economic pressure from an inferior but eager —
position in world trade; and new energies of Renaissance’

best combination of explanations for why Europe began to.
reach out in new ways?

9.4 Outside the World
Network

How did patterns in the Americas and Polynesia reflect
their isolation from main transregional trade networks?

Developments in the Americas and Polynesia were not af-
fected by the new international exchange. During the next
period of world history, these regions all were pulled into
a new level of international contact, but a world balance
sheet in 1400 must emphasize their separateness.

At the same time, several of the societies outside

This eighteenth-century engraving portrays Vasco da Gama’s :
audience with the Indian ruler of Calicut in 1498, This image was made them vulnerable to outside interference thereafter. Such

weil after the fact. What kind of comparison does it suggest between problems included new political strains in the leading

European and Indian societies?

the international network were experiencing some new
problems during the fifteenth century that would leave

American civilizations and a fragmentation of the principal

Universal Art Archive/Alamy Stock Photo

island groups in Polynesian culture.

9.4.1 Political Issues in the Americas

As we discussed in Chapter 8, the Aztec and Inca empires ran into increasing difficulties
not long after 1400. Aztec exploitation of subject peoples for gold, slaves, and religious
sacrifices roused great resentment. What would have happened to the Aztec Empire if
the Spaniards had not intervened after 1500 is not clear, but it is obvious that disunity
created opportunities for outside intervention that might not have existed otherwise. The
Inca system, although far less brutal than that of the Aztecs, provided ongoing tension
between central leadership and local initiative. This complicated effective control of the
vast expanse of the Inca domains. Here too, overextension made change likely by the
1500s—indeed, the empire was already receding somewhat—even without European in-
tervention. At the same time, other cultures were developing in parts of the Americas
that might well have been candidates for new political leadership, if American history
had proceeded in isolation or if European intervention had been less sweeping.

9.4.2 Expansion, Migration, and Conquest in Polynesia

A second region that was later pulled into the expanding world network involved Poly-
nesia. Here, as in the Americas, important changes took place during the postclassical

4
5
deed, voyages of exploration down the coast of Africa and 4
across the Atlantic began to occur as the island colonies _

4

merchants and Iberian rulers. In final analysis, what is the a

era but with no relationship to developments in societies elsewhere in the world. The

--- End of Page 14 ---
Chapter 9; The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 227

key Polynesian themes from the seventh century
to 1400 were expansion, spurts of migration, and
conquests that implanted Polynesian culture
well beyond the initial base in islands such as
qahiti, Samoa, and Fiji (Map 9.1).

One channel of migration pointed north-
ward to the islands of Hawaii. The first Poly-

Map 9.1 POLYNESIAN EXPANSION

tof nesians reached these previously uninhabited
ithe islands before the seventh century, traveling in
‘dto at war canoes. The canoes carried all that was
‘ager needed to settle on new lands, including pigs.
ance These were to wreak some havoc on native flora
8 the and fauna in Hawaii, but at the same time Ha-
an to waiians created a land use system incorporating

coastal fisheries, mid-mountain vegetable crops,
i and highland hunting that supported a sustain-
able lifestyle for centuries.

From the seventh century until about 1300
or 1400, recurrent contacts remained between
the Hawaiian Islands and the larger Society Is-

ect lands group, allowing periodic new migration.
ks? But from about 1400 until the arrival of Euro-
pean explorers in 1778, Hawaiian society was

ated cut off even from Polynesia.

ne Polynesians in Hawaii spread widely

na ecross the islands in agricultur al clusters and Starting in the seventh century, the Polynesians expanded north and south of their
fishing villages amid the volcanic mountains. _ starting point in the Society Islands.

; Hawaiians were inventive in using local vege- - .
tside tation, weaving fabrics as well as making materials and fishing nets from grass. Po-
neg litically, Hawaii was organized into regional kingdoms, which were highly warlike.
eve Society was structured into a caste system with priests and nobles at the top, who
Such d teserved many lands for their exclusive use. Commoners were viewed almost as a sep-
ding arate people, barred from certain activities.
cipal Thus, with a Neolithic agricultural technology and no use of metals, the Hawaiians

created a complex culture on their islands. Without a written language, their legends and
oral histories, tracing the genealogies of chiefly families back to the original war canoes,
provided a shared set of stories and values.
alties
-_ 9.4.3 Isolated Achievements by the Maori
nie 3 Another group of Polynesians migrated thousands of miles to the southwest of the Soci-
The ety Islands, perhaps as early as the eighth century, when canoe or raft crews discovered
sion the two large islands that today make up New Zealand. The original numbers of peo-
ifthe. ple were small but were supplemented over the centuries that followed by additional
ythe migrations from the Polynesian home islands. The Polynesians in New Zealand, called
nite the Maori, Successfully adapted to an environment considerably colder and harsher than
ricas- that of the home islands. They developed the most elaborate of all Polynesian art and

tory Ptoduced an expanding population that may have reached 200,000 people by the eigh-
teenth century, primarily on the northern of the two islands. As in Hawaii, tribal military
Jeaders and priests held great power in Maori society; each tribe also included a group of
Slaves drawn from prisoners of war and their descendants. All these achievements were

la .

accomplished in total isolation from the rest of the world and, particularly after 1400,
ie ’
: y amid substantial isolation of each major island grouping from the rest of the Polynesian
sic

“smplex. Polynesians would be the last of the major isolated cultures to encounter the


--- End of Page 15 ---
228 = Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

larger world currents brought forcefully by European explorers in the eighteenth centy

When this encounter did come, it produced the same effects that it had in the Americas i

vulnerability to disease, weakness in the face of superior weaponry and technology, ang

cultural disintegration.

Thinking Historically
The Problem of Ethnocentrism

Many cultures encourage an ethnocentric outlook, and the
culture of the West is certainly one of them. Ethnocentrism
creates problems in interpreting world history. The dictionary
definition of ethnocentrism is “a habitual disposition to judge
foreign peoples or groups by the standards and practices
of one’s own culture or ethnic group”—often finding them
inferior. Most of us take pride in many of our own institutions
and values, and it is tempting to move from this pride to a
disapproval of other peoples when they ciearly do not share
our behaviors and beliefs. Many Americans have a difficult
time understanding how other peoples have failed to establish
the democratic political structure of our own country.
Even liberals who pride themselves on a sophisticated
appreciation of different habits in some areas may adopt an
ethnocentric shock at the oppression (by current American
standards) of women that is visible in certain societies today
or in the past. Indeed, unless a person is almost totally
alienated from his or her own society, some ethnoceniric
reactions are hard to avoid.
Nevertheless, unexamined
ethnocentrism can be a barrier
in dealing with world history. We
will grasp other times and places
better, and perhaps use our own

Controlling ethnocentrism does

not mean abandoning all stan-

dards, as if any social behavior
were as good as any other.

of time. They may differ from our taste, but their patterns
respond to valid causes and problems. Our own values

are nat without complexity. We sometimes believe things. j
about our own society that are not as true as we want, or
in judging other societies, we forget about drawbacks in our —
own surroundings. Perspective on our own habits, including
awareness of how other cultures might judge us, helps us ¥

restrain our ethnocentrism.

However, ethnocentrism may become a _ particularly —

strong impulse in dealing with some of the changes in world

history taking shape around 1400. The West was gaining —

strength. Because many Americans identify with Westem
civilization, it is tempting to downplay some of the subtleties
and disadvantages of this process or to exaggerate the extent
to which the West began to organize world history more
generally.

The balance of power among civilizations was beginning to
shift around 1400, and itis legitimate —not simply ethnocentric—
to note that the West's rise was
one of the leading features of this
change. It is unnecessary to ignore
the many other patterns continuing
or emerging—including new vigor
in several other societies—or to

values more intelligently, if we
do not too readily dismiss cultures in which “objectionable”
practices occur.

Ethnocentrism is not just an issue for modern Westerners.
Civilized peoples in the past routinely accused outsiders
of barbaric ways, as in the Islamic characterizations of the
Mongols described in Chapter 3. But the current power of
Wesiern standards makes our own ethnocentric potential
a real issue today in dealing with world history, as in the
tendency to dismiss any people who did not exploit the latest.
available military technology as somehow inferior.

Controlling ethnocentrism does not mean abandoning
all standards, as if any social behavior were as good as
any other. It does involve a certain open-mindedness and
sophistication. Reducing distracting levels of ethnocentrism
can be aided by some specific procedures. It is important to
realize that few cultures behave irrationally over long periods

gloss over the very mixed moiives
and results that the West's rise entailed. The rise of the West
was not just “good.” It did not result simply from a triumph
of progressive values. It did depend heavily on new uses of
force. At the same time, avoiding ethnocentric impulses in
evaluating this crucial transition period in world history does

“not require a systematically anti-Western approach. Balance

and perspective are essential—which is easy to say, but not
always easy to achieve.

Review Questions:
1. Why can ethnocentrism complicate interpretations of
world history?
2. How can one balance disapproval and understanding
in dealing with practices such as female infanticide?
3. What are some non-ethnocentric ways to interpret initial
European expansion?


--- End of Page 16 ---
Chapter 9: The World in 1450: Changing Balance of World Power 229

icas, 94.4 Adding up the Changes

It is tempting to see some sort of master plan in the various changes that began to occur
around 1400. People who emphasize an ethnocentric approach to world history, stressing
some inherent superiorities in Western values, might be tempted to simplify the factors
involved. However, a series of complex coincidences provides a more accurate explana-
tion, as in other cases in which the framework of world history changed substantially—
though it is true that reactions to the decline of the Mongols did activate a number of

changes. Independent developments in the Americas-and elsewhere figured in, as did

i crucial policy decisions in places such as China. Each of the separate steps can be ex-
plained, but their combination was partly accidental.
a Several elements of the world history transition deserve particular attention. Tech-
«al ; nology played a role, as opportunities to copy Asian developments were supplemented
by European initiative, particularly in gunnery and ship design. The role of individuals,
“a such as Prince Henry, must be compared with the impact of more general forces, such as
° a Europe’s international trade woes.
vaing The overall result of change affected even societies where existing patterns persisted.
slg Sub-Saharan Africa, for example, was not experiencing great political or cultural shifts
around 1400. Regional kingdoms fluctuated: The empire of Mali fell to regional rivals,
ual but another Muslim kingdom, Songhay, soon arose in its stead, flourishing between
“on 1464 and 1591. African political and religious themes persisted for several centuries, but
unng the context for African history was shifting. The decline of the Arabs reduced the vital-
ist ity of Africa’s key traditional contact with the international network, although African
teties merchants remained comfortable in dealing with North Africa and the Middle East. In
a contrast to the Europeans, Africans had no exchange with the Mongols. Even as Africa
mn enjoyed substantial continuity, its power balance with Western Europe was beginning to
ingta alter, and this became a source of further change.
itric—
» was ~
ad Global Connections and Central Themes
veel 1450 and the World
or to = The first half of the fifteenth century saw both change and they began to pay attention to other contacts as well. Overall,
otives continuity in the contacts that affected so many societies in at a time of many regional changes, the defining relationship
West = Asia, Africa, and Europe. Change came in the procession of to the patterns of global contact was a vital one, and by 1450
umph = Societies that served as active agents for contacts. Muslim it was in flux.
ies of | traders and missionaries from the Middle East continued The key continuity involved the interest and dependence
‘es in to be active, particularly in the Indian Ocean and in dealing of many societies on interregional trade and other contacts.
does = with Africa. But the period of Mongol consolidation had African merchants and leaders continued to rely heavily
lance ij introduced a new set of contacts, many of them land-based on interactions with the Middle East. Western Europe’s
it not and involving Asia and Europe. Mongol overlords turned out to involvement in contacts was intensifying. Southeast Asia
: be delighted to encounter different ideas and to use officials was increasingly drawn in, not only to trade but also to
from many different places .and cultures. Mongol decline Muslim missionary efforts. The Middle East, India, and China
returned attention to sea-based contacts, particularly in the continued to welcome the availability of goods and merchant
f Indian Ocean. This was where, for a brief time, China took its activities beyond their own borders, even though their regional
unusually active stance. The Mongol era left other impacts economies remained robust. The diverse advantages of Afro-
ng a8 well: Japan, proud of its avoidance of Mongol occupation Eurasian contacts were widely realized, even amid changes in
2 'N contrast to China, began to think in terms of greater self- trade routes and regional initiatives.
aitial Sufficiency, with less reliance on imitation and elaborate Developments in the decades around the mid-fifteenth
Contacts with China. Russian leaders, initially around Moscow, century both reflected and intensified the transcontinental
— began to gain greater independence from Mongol control; network. The level of intercontinental connections developed

their chief goal involved further expansions of territory, but

in the postclassical period allowed increasingly rapid


--- End of Page 17 ---
230. Part Il: The Mongol Age, 1200-1450

imitation in areas like technology. This gave once-backward
societies, like Western Europe, a chance to accelerate their
economic and military development. The networks also
brought sufficient advantages, in access to luxury consumer
goods, that the decline of one trade system—for example,
the overland Mongo! routes once the Mongol holdings began
to shrink—quickly brought forward other societies eager

to develop an alternative framework—the Chinese, then
the Europeans. This process, from the Mongols onward, e
quickened the pace of contact, from ambitious travelers
like lbn Battuta and Marco Polo, to imaginative Merchants of
and explorers. The stage was set for the next phase in the =i

first time, be directly involved.

Further. Readings

On the Chinese expeditions: Edward Dreyer, Zheng He, Chi-
na and the Oceans in the Early Ming, 1405-1433 (2007); Louise
Levathes, When China Ruled the Seas: The Treasure Fleet of the
Dragon Throne, 1405-33 (1996).

An important, highly readable interpretation of the
West’s.rise in a world context is C. Cipolla, Guns, Sails, and
Empires: Technological Innovation and the Early Phases of Eu-
ropean Expansion, 1400-1700 (1985). See also John M. Hob-
son, The Eastern Origins of Western Civilization (2004); and K.
Ciggaar and M. Metcalf, eds., East and West in the Medieval
Eastern Mediterranean (2006). An important interpretation
of new Western interests is S. W. Mintz, Sweetness and Pow-
er: The Place of Sugar in Modern History (1985).

On the Black Death and economic dislocation, see
M. W. Dols, The Black Death in the Middle East (1977); W. H.
McNeill, Plagues and Peoples (1976); and the very readable
B. Tuchman, A Distant Mirror: The Calamitous 14th Century
(1979). A provocative study of relevant Western outlook is
P. Ariés, The Hour of Our Death (1981).

Critical Thinking Questions

1. What were the consequences of the fall of the Byz-
antine Empire? Was this a short-term or long-term
change in world history?

2. What was new about Renaissance culture? Is it
possible to use a cultural change of this sort to
explain innovations in trade and exploration?

3. What caused the main differences between.
developments in West Africa and those in

4
globalization process, in which the whole world would, for the ‘
2

J. Huizinga, The Waning of the Middle Ages (1973), deals:
with the decline of medieval forms in Europe. See also Gerald
MacLean, ed., Re-Orienting the Renaissance: Cultural Exchanges
with the East (2005). On the Renaissance, Walter Pater, The Re
naissance: Studies in Art and Poetry (2011); Gary Fergusan, Queer
i re)readings of the French Renaissance (2008); Guido Ruggiero, —
Machiavelli in Love: Sex, Self, and Society in the Italian Renaissance
(2007); Manfredo Tafuri, Interpreting the Renaissance: Princes
Cities, Architects (2006); John Jeffries Martin, ed., The Renais. —
sance: Italy and Abroad (2003); and Richard Mackenney, Rennis-
sances: The Cultures of Italy c. 1300-c. 1600 (2005). On Spain,
see FE. Braudel, The Mediterranean and the Mediterranean World,
2 vols. (1978); and E. Paris, The End of Days (1995), on Spanish
Jews and the Inquisition. On expansion in general, see Robert
Bartlett, The Making of Europe: Conquest, Colonization, and Cul-
tural Change (1993). :

An excellent overview of the period is Janet L. Abu-
Lughod’s Before European Hegemony: The World System
A.D. 1250-1350 (1989).

Western Europe during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries?

4. Should China have maintained its commitment
to great expeditions? Is this a valid historical
question?

5. What distinctive features of Polynesian society
reflected lack of contact with other major centers?

|
i
|
|
|
|
:
.
|
)


--- End of Page 18 ---
